MAIN CONT DIV START

An Act to extend the laws in Canada that proscribe discrimination


Short Title


Marginal note:Short title

1 This Act may be cited as the Canadian Human Rights Act.


Purpose of Act


Marginal note:Purpose

2 The purpose of this Act is to extend the laws in Canada to give effect, within the purview of matters coming within the legislative authority of Parliament, to the principle that all individuals should have an opportunity equal with other individuals to make for themselves the lives that they are able and wish to have and to have their needs accommodated, consistent with their duties and obligations as members of society, without being hindered in or prevented from doing so by discriminatory practices based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, age, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, marital status, family status, genetic characteristics, disability or conviction for an offence for which a pardon has been granted or in respect of which a record suspension has been ordered.


PART IProscribed Discrimination



General


Marginal note:Prohibited grounds of discrimination

Marginal note:Multiple grounds of discrimination

3.1 For greater certainty, a discriminatory practice includes a practice based on one or more prohibited grounds of discrimination or on the effect of a combination of prohibited grounds.

Marginal note:Orders regarding discriminatory practices

4 A discriminatory practice, as described in sections 5 to 14.1, may be the subject of a complaint under Part III and anyone found to be engaging or to have engaged in a discriminatory practice may be made subject to an order as provided in section 53.


Discriminatory Practices


Marginal note:Denial of good, service, facility or accommodation

5 It is a discriminatory practice in the provision of goods, services, facilities or accommodation customarily available to the general public

on a prohibited ground of discrimination.

Marginal note:Denial of commercial premises or residential accommodation

6 It is a discriminatory practice in the provision of commercial premises or residential accommodation

on a prohibited ground of discrimination.

Marginal note:Employment

7 It is a discriminatory practice, directly or indirectly,

on a prohibited ground of discrimination.

Marginal note:Employment applications, advertisements

8 It is a discriminatory practice

that expresses or implies any limitation, specification or preference based on a prohibited ground of discrimination.

Marginal note:Employee organizations

Marginal note:Discriminatory policy or practice

10 It is a discriminatory practice for an employer, employee organization or employer organization

that deprives or tends to deprive an individual or class of individuals of any employment opportunities on a prohibited ground of discrimination.

Marginal note:Equal wages

Marginal note:Publication of discriminatory notices, etc.

12 It is a discriminatory practice to publish or display before the public or to cause to be published or displayed before the public any notice, sign, symbol, emblem or other representation that

if the discrimination expressed or implied, intended to be expressed or implied or incited or calculated to be incited would otherwise, if engaged in, be a discriminatory practice described in any of sections 5 to 11 or in section 14.

13 [Repealed, 2013, c. 37, s. 2]

Marginal note:Harassment

Marginal note:Retaliation

14.1 It is a discriminatory practice for a person against whom a complaint has been filed under Part III, or any person acting on their behalf, to retaliate or threaten retaliation against the individual who filed the complaint or the alleged victim.

Marginal note:Exceptions

Marginal note:Special programs

Marginal note:Plans to meet the needs of disabled persons

Marginal note:Rescinding approval of plan

Marginal note:Opportunity to make representations

Marginal note:Certain provisions not discriminatory

20 A provision of a pension or insurance fund or plan that preserves rights acquired before March 1, 1978 or that preserves pension or other benefits accrued before that day does not constitute the basis for a complaint under Part III that an employer, employee organization or employer organization is engaging or has engaged in a discriminatory practice.

Marginal note:Funds and plans

21 The establishment of separate pension funds or plans for different groups of employees does not constitute the basis for a complaint under Part III that an employer, employee organization or employer organization is engaging or has engaged in a discriminatory practice if the employees are not grouped in those funds or plans according to a prohibited ground of discrimination.

Marginal note:Regulations

22 The Governor in Council may, by regulation, prescribe the provisions of any pension or insurance fund or plan, in addition to the provisions described in sections 20 and 21, that do not constitute the basis for a complaint under Part III that an employer, employee organization or employer organization is engaging or has engaged in a discriminatory practice.

Marginal note:Regulations

23 The Governor in Council may make regulations respecting the terms and conditions to be included in or applicable to any contract, licence or grant made or granted by Her Majesty in right of Canada providing for

Marginal note:Accessibility standards

Marginal note:Definitions

25 In this Act,


PART IICanadian Human Rights Commission


Marginal note:Commission established


Powers, Duties and Functions


Marginal note:Powers, duties and functions

Marginal note:Assignment of duties

Marginal note:Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities

28.1 The Commission is, for the purposes of paragraph 2 of article 33 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 13, 2006, designated as a body responsible for monitoring the Government of Canada’s implementation of that Convention.

Marginal note:Regulations

29 The Governor in Council, on the recommendation of the Commission, may make regulations authorizing the Commission to exercise such powers and perform such duties and functions, in addition to those prescribed by this Act, as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this Part and Parts I and III.


Remuneration


Marginal note:Salaries and remuneration


Officers and Staff


Marginal note:Chief Commissioner

Marginal note:Staff

Marginal note:Accessibility unit

32.1 The officers and employees of the Commission that support the Accessibility Commissioner in the exercise of his or her powers and the performance of his or her duties and functions under the Accessible Canada Act may be referred to as the “Accessibility Unit”.

Marginal note:Pay Equity Unit

32.2 The officers and employees of the Commission that support the Pay Equity Commissioner in the exercise of his or her powers and the performance of his or her duties and functions under the Pay Equity Act may be referred to as the “Pay Equity Unit”.

Marginal note:Compliance with security requirements

Marginal note:Head office

Marginal note:Majority is a decision of the Commission

35 A decision of the majority of the members present at a meeting of the Commission, if the members present constitute a quorum, is a decision of the Commission.

Marginal note:Establishment of divisions

Marginal note:Pay Equity Division

Marginal note:By-laws

Marginal note:Superannuation, etc.

38 The full-time members of the Commission are deemed to be persons employed in the public service for the purposes of the Public Service Superannuation Act and to be employed in the federal public administration for the purposes of the Government Employees Compensation Act and any regulations made under section 9 of the Aeronautics Act.


Accessibility Commissioner


Marginal note:Powers, duties and functions

38.1 In addition to being a member of the Commission, the Accessibility Commissioner has the powers, duties and functions assigned to him or her by the Accessible Canada Act.

Marginal note:Absence or incapacity of Accessibility Commissioner

38.2 In the event of the absence or incapacity of the Accessibility Commissioner, or if the office of Accessibility Commissioner is vacant, the Chief Commissioner may authorize any member of the Commission, other than himself or herself, to exercise the powers and perform the duties and functions of the Accessibility Commissioner, but no member may be so authorized for a term of more than 90 days without the Governor in Council’s approval.


Pay Equity Commissioner


Marginal note:Powers, duties and functions

38.3 In addition to being a member of the Commission, the Pay Equity Commissioner must exercise the powers and perform the duties and functions assigned to him or her by the Pay Equity Act.

Marginal note:Absence or incapacity of Pay Equity Commissioner


PART IIIDiscriminatory Practices and General Provisions


Definition of discriminatory practice

39 For the purposes of this Part, a discriminatory practice means any practice that is a discriminatory practice within the meaning of sections 5 to 14.1.

Marginal note:Complaints

Marginal note:Disclosure of personal information

40.01 For the purpose of the administration of the Accessible Canada Act, an officer or employee of the Commission may disclose to the Accessibility Commissioner any personal information that is contained in a complaint filed with the Commission.

Marginal note:Definitions

Marginal note:Non-application of sections 7, 10 and 11

Marginal note:Commission to deal with complaint

Marginal note:Notice


Investigation


Marginal note:Designation of investigator

Marginal note:Report

Marginal note:Definition of Review Agency

Marginal note:Report


Conciliator


Marginal note:Appointment of conciliator


Settlement


Marginal note:Referral of a settlement to Commission


Canadian Human Rights Tribunal


Marginal note:Establishment of Tribunal

Marginal note:Terms of office

Marginal note:Remedial and disciplinary measures

Marginal note:Status of members

Marginal note:Residence

48.5 The full-time members of the Tribunal shall reside in the National Capital Region, as described in the schedule to the National Capital Act, or within forty kilometres of that Region.

Marginal note:Remuneration

Marginal note:Head office

48.7 The head office of the Tribunal shall be in the National Capital Region, as described in the schedule to the National Capital Act.

48.8 [Repealed, 2014, c. 20, s. 415]

Marginal note:Conduct of proceedings


Inquiries into Complaints


Marginal note:Request for inquiry

Marginal note:Conduct of inquiry

Marginal note:Duty of Commission on appearing

51 In appearing at a hearing, presenting evidence and making representations, the Commission shall adopt such position as, in its opinion, is in the public interest having regard to the nature of the complaint.

Marginal note:Hearing in public subject to confidentiality order

Marginal note:Complaint dismissed

Marginal note:Limitation

54 No order that is made under subsection 53(2) may contain a term

Marginal note:Definitions

55 and 56 [Repealed, 1998, c. 9, s. 29]

Marginal note:Enforcement of order

57 An order under section 53 may, for the purpose of enforcement, be made an order of the Federal Court by following the usual practice and procedure or by the Commission filing in the Registry of the Court a copy of the order certified to be a true copy.

Marginal note:Application respecting disclosure of information

Marginal note:Intimidation or discrimination

59 No person shall threaten, intimidate or discriminate against an individual because that individual has made a complaint or given evidence or assisted in any way in respect of the initiation or prosecution of a complaint or other proceeding under this Part, or because that individual proposes to do so.


Offences and Punishment


Marginal note:Offence


Reports


Marginal note:Annual report of Commission


Minister Responsible


Marginal note:Minister of Justice

61.1 The Minister of Justice is responsible for this Act, and the powers of the Governor in Council to make regulations under this Act, with the exception of section 29, are exercisable on the recommendation of that Minister.


Application


Marginal note:Limitation

Marginal note:Application in the territories

63 Where a complaint under this Part relates to an act or omission that occurred in Yukon, the Northwest Territories or Nunavut, it may not be dealt with under this Part unless the act or omission could be the subject of a complaint under this Part had it occurred in a province.

Marginal note:Canadian Forces and Royal Canadian Mounted Police

64 For the purposes of this Part and Parts I and II, members of the Canadian Forces and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police are deemed to be employed by the Crown.

Marginal note:Acts of employees, etc.


PART IVApplication


Marginal note:Binding on Her Majesty

67 [Repealed, 2008, c. 30, s. 1]


RELATED PROVISIONS



AMENDMENTS NOT IN FORCE


MAIN CONT DIV END


Page Details
