Skip to main content
Skip to "About government"
Switch to basic HTML version
Language selection
Français
/ Gouvernement du Canada
Search
Search National Defence
Search
Menu
MAIN
MENU
You are here:
Canada.ca National Defence Policies and standards Defence Administrative Orders and Directives Defence Administrative Orders and Directives (DAOD ) - 5000 DAOD 5026 - Table of Contents
DAOD 5026-0, Civilian Grievances
Table of Contents
Introduction
Policy Direction
Authorities
References
1. Introduction

Date of Issue: 2005-04-01

Application: This is a directive that applies to employees of the Department of National Defence (DND employees) and an order that applies to officers and non-commissioned members of the Canadian Armed Forces (CAF members) who act as managers or supervisors of DND employees.

Supersession:

CPAO 7.01, Adjudication Procedures
CPAO 7.07, The Grievance Procedure
CPAO 7.08, National Joint Council Redress Procedure

Approval Authority: This DAOD is issued under the authority of the Assistant Deputy Minister (Human Resources - Civilian) (ADM(HR-Civ)).

Enquiries: Director Labour Relations Policies and Programs (DLRPP)

2. Policy Direction
Context

2.1 Part 2 of the Public Service Labour Relations Act (PSLRA) provides the legislative authority for employees and bargaining agents to present grievances.

Policy Statement

2.2 The DND and the CAF are committed to:

resolving departmental and National Joint Council (NJC) grievances; and
respecting the adjudication process.
Requirements

2.3 The DND shall:

establish:
a departmental grievance procedure for all three categories of grievances (individual, group, policy) set out in the PLSRA; and
the authority levels within the grievance procedure;
develop and implement guidelines:
with respect to the departmental grievance procedure;
outlining the departmental responsibilities in the Public Service Labour Relations Board (PSLRB) adjudication process; and
with respect to the departmental component of the NJC grievance procedure;
provide managers and supervisors with guidance, support and training with respect to departmental and NJC grievances.

2.4 The DND and the CAF shall:

ensure that DND employees are well informed of the departmental grievance procedure; and
attempt to resolve departmental and NJC grievances at the lowest level possible.
3. Authorities
Authority Table

3.1 The following table identifies the authorities associated with this DAOD:

The …	has the authority to …


ADM(HR-Civ)


approve and issue directives on the:
departmental grievance and the departmental component of the NJC grievance procedures; and
PSLRB adjudication process;
oversee the effectiveness of the directives.



Director General Labour Relations and Compensation


establish guidelines on the:
departmental grievance and the departmental component of the NJC grievance procedures; and
PSLRB adjudication process;
act as the final departmental level of the grievance procedure.
4. References
Acts, Regulations, Central Agency Policies and Policy DAOD
Public Service Labour Relations Act
Public Service Labour Relations Board Regulations
Adjudication, Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat
Grievance Procedure, Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat
Terms and Conditions of Employment Policy, Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat
National Joint Council Bylaws
Applicable collective agreements
Other References
Financial Administration Act
National Joint Council Directives
Guidelines for Adjudication
Guidelines for Civilian Grievances
Alternative Dispute Resolution Program
Page details
 2024-11-27
About this site
National Defence
Contact us
News
Jobs
Government of Canada
All contacts
Departments and agencies
About government
Themes and topics
Jobs
Immigration and citizenship
Travel and tourism
Business
Benefits
Health
Taxes
Environment and natural resources
National security and defence
Culture, history and sport
Policing, justice and emergencies
Transport and infrastructure
Canada and the world
Money and finances
Science and innovation
Indigenous Peoples
Veterans and military
Youth
Manage life events
Government of Canada Corporate
Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy