Skip to main content
Skip to "About government"
Switch to basic HTML version
Language selection
Français
/ Gouvernement du Canada
Search
Search National Defence
Search
Menu
MAIN
MENU
You are here:
Canada.ca National Defence Policies and standards Defence Administrative Orders and Directives Defence Administrative Orders and Directives (DAOD ) - 5000 DAOD 5005 - Table of Contents
DAOD 5005-1, Governance of Civilian Human Resources Management
Table of Contents
Introduction
Governance Structure
Responsibilities
References
1. Introduction

Date of Issue: 2003-02-28

Application: This is a directive that applies to employees of the Department of National Defence (DND) and an order that applies to officers and non-commissioned members of the Canadian Armed Forces (CAF members) who act as managers of DND employees.

Approval Authority: This DAOD is issued under the authority of the Director, Business Management, (ADM(HR - Civ)) Chief of Staff (COS).

Enquiries: ADM(HR - Civ) Chief of Staff (COS)

2. Governance Structure
Accountability Framework

2.1 The governance structure for civilian human resources management consists of an accountability framework that includes:

functional direction;
performance measurement;
committee structure; and
delegation of authorities.
Functional Direction

2.2 ADM(HR - Civ) shall produce a functional plan to provide strategic direction and guidance to other senior managers, as set out in the Defence Plan On-Line, with respect to the execution of the civilian human resources program including:

functional guidance on the alignment of departmental and Public Service priorities;
planning guidance related to operational needs;
consistent, cohesive, coherent and integrated direction and standards; and
co-ordination and management of issues and activities related to corporate civilian human resources committees.
Performance Measurement Framework

2.3 The civilian human resources performance measurement framework:

provides senior managers with a common set of balanced, results-oriented performance information that will assist them in decision-making on civilian human resources management matters;
focuses on a comprehensive set of measures and indicators that directly address the priorities of DND and the CAF for civilian human resources management; and
links to the DND and CAF performance measurement framework.
Civilian Human Resources Management Committees

2.4 The main senior management committees in DND and the CAF with specific mandates to address civilian human resources management matters are the:

Defence Management Committee (DMC);
Civilian Human Resource Committee (CHRC);
Strategic Human Resource Management Council (SHRMC);
Civilian Human Resource Planning and Coordination Committee (CHRPCC);
Union Management Consultative Committee; and
Regional Human Resources Planning and Coordination Committees.
Committee Structure

2.5 The following chart describes the Civilian Human Resources Management Committee Structure:

2.6 The Defence Management Committee (DMC) provides DM/CDS with decision support/advice with respect to issues of strategic importance relating to strategic resource allocation, in addition to others, thereby providing for the establishment of sub-committees to deal with human resources issues.

2.7 DMC is supported by the Civilian Human Resources Committee (CHRC) which provides the DM, the committee chair, with a policy and decision-making body for strategic civilian human resources management issues.

2.8 The national Civilian Human Resources Planning and Coordination Committee (CHRPCC), chaired by the Assistant Deputy Minister (Human Resources-Civilian), is subordinate to the CHRC and serves as the strategic cross-functional forum for stakeholders to formulate, prioritize, recommend, review and monitor civilian human resources management plans, policies and strategies. The national CHRPCC is supported by the Regional Human Resources Planning and Coordination Committee, chaired by Regional Service Centre Directors; strategic issues raised at these meetings are staffed up to the national CHRPCC for discussion and resolution.

2.9 The Strategic Human Resource Management Council (SHRMC), co-chaired by the Assistant Deputy Minister (Human Resources – Civilian) and Assistant Deputy Minister (Human Resources – Military), serves as a forum to involve senior line managers and stakeholders across the organization in discussing, resolving and providing guidance on strategic resource policies and issues.

2.10 An important ancillary committee is the Union-Management Consultation Committee, which was established to deal with department-wide policies, programs and strategic issues. DND management are represented by the DM, L1s and other management representatives designated by the DM. Bargaining agents and union representatives are represented by national Union Presidents and Heads of Unions or their delegates.

Flow of Issues through the Committee Structure

2.11 Consideration should be given to conducting business and decision-making through avenues other than committees. However if committee consultation is required, the aim is to have the right information available for the right people at the right time and to resolve issues at the lowest level possible.

2.12 A clear delineation of responsibilities between committees is required for good governance practices. The terms of reference of the civilian human resources management committees outline the mandate for each committee and are listed in the Related References block.

2.13 In general the following table represents the flow of issues through the committee structure:

Items that ...	should be raised ...


focus on regional matters



first for discussion and issue resolution at the applicable Regional Human Resources Planning and Coordination Committee.




require elevation



by regional staff through their chain of command.




require national level committee consultation



to the CHRPCC or SHRMC.




are solely related to civilian human resources management



to the CHRC.




are both joint military and civilian human resources management issues



to DMC, if required.

3. Responsibilities
Responsibility Table

3.1 The following table identifies the responsibilities for this policy:

The ...	is/are responsible for ...


ADM(HR - Civ)


developing, implementing and managing corporate civilian human resources management plans, strategies, policies and programs to recruit, develop and retain civilian employees;
providing supporting tools, advisory and operational services;
identifying issues of critical importance to civilian human resource management;
fully integrating and ensuring the consistent application of all civilian human resources functions; and
administering civilian human resource policies and programs.



senior managers


managing their civilian employees according to the ADM(HR - Civ) functional direction and guidance;
developing and implementing strategic and operational civilian human resource plans for their organizations; and
managing civilian human resources within their area of responsibility.



civilian and military managers


managing their civilian employees in accordance with the relevant legislation, terms and conditions of employment, collective agreements, directions of central agencies and public service-wide values and principles of human resources management.
4. References
Acts, Regulations, Central Agency Policies and Policy DAOD
DAOD 5005-0, Civilian Human Resources Management
Defence Plan On-Line
Other References
ADM(HR - Civ) Functional Plan
Civilian Human Resources Management Performance Measurement Framework
Terms of Reference for the Civilian Human Resource Committee
Terms of Reference for the Strategic Human Resource Management Council
Terms of Reference for the Civilian Human Resource Planning and Coordination Committee
Terms of Reference for the Union Management Consultative Committee
Terms of Reference for the Regional Planning and Coordination Committees
Regulations, policies and directives of central agencies
Page details
 2018-12-13
About this site
National Defence
Contact us
News
Jobs
Government of Canada
All contacts
Departments and agencies
About government
Themes and topics
Jobs
Immigration and citizenship
Travel and tourism
Business
Benefits
Health
Taxes
Environment and natural resources
National security and defence
Culture, history and sport
Policing, justice and emergencies
Transport and infrastructure
Canada and the world
Money and finances
Science and innovation
Indigenous Peoples
Veterans and military
Youth
Manage life events
Government of Canada Corporate
Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy