Skip to main content
Skip to "About government"
Switch to basic HTML version
Language selection
Français
/ Gouvernement du Canada
Search
Search National Defence
Search
Menu
MAIN
MENU
You are here:
Canada.ca National Defence Policies and standards Defence Administrative Orders and Directives Defence Administrative Orders and Directives (DAOD ) - 5000 DAOD 5046 - Table of Contents
DAOD 5046-0, Alternative Dispute Resolution
Table of Contents
Introduction
Definition
Policy Direction
Authorities
References
1. Introduction

Date of Issue: 2005-05-13

Application: This is a directive that applies to employees of the Department of National Defence (DND employees) and an order that applies to officers and non-commissioned members of the Canadian Armed Forces (CAF members).

Supersession: CANFORGEN 064/03, Conflict Management Program (CMP)

Approval Authorities:

Assistant Deputy Minister (Human Resources - Military) (ADM(HR-Mil)); and
Assistant Deputy Minister (Human Resources - Civilian) (ADM(HR-Civ)).

Enquiries: Director General Alternative Dispute Resolution (DGADR)

2. Definition

alternative dispute resolution (mode alternatif de résolution des conflits)

Alternative dispute resolution means any process used to resolve disputes, other than the more formal, traditional or legal methods of resolving disputes such as:

court adjudication;
tribunals;
the DND and the CF grievance processes; and
the DND and the CF harassment complaint processes.

It includes a variety of processes such as:

negotiation (self-resolution);
mediation (third party assistance); and
coaching (of parties to a dispute).
3. Policy Direction
Context

3.1 The DND and the CAF promote a working environment that respects ethics and values, builds morale and encourages a high level of operational readiness. The DND and the CAF recognize that in order for this to occur, a range of dispute resolution (DR) processes must be available to address conflict that will inevitably arise.

3.2 As an integral component of the DR range, alternative dispute resolution (ADR) processes:

support the chain of command;
support the role and mandate of unions;
promote unit cohesion and morale;
contribute to operational effectiveness;
support the priorities of the DND and the CAF;
provide users at all levels with a process to resolve issues at the lowest level and at the earliest stage;
complement other formal processes;
provide easily accessible, voluntary, multi-optional processes that are integrated with existing processes; and
do not restrict the chain of command from taking appropriate administrative or disciplinary action.

3.3 The goal in implementing these ADR processes is to prevent disputes from arising or escalating wherever possible and, if they do arise, to facilitate their resolution informally and quickly. The benefits of such processes include:

improved morale and productivity;
a reduction in the number of formal grievances; and
a reduction of the time and money spent dealing with them.

3.4 ADR processes do not replace existing formal, traditional, legal methods of resolving disputes. DND employees and CAF members continue to have the right to use other available DR processes and to return to any of these processes even after ADR has been attempted.

3.5 Detailed information on ADR and its use is contained in the Conflict Management Program - Guidelines for the Use of Alternative Dispute Resolution Processes.

Policy Statement

3.6 The DND and the CAF are committed to:

resolving workplace conflicts in a timely and cooperative manner;
establishing, promoting and utilizing ADR as the preferred approach to preventing the escalation of disputes and resolving workplace disputes wherever and whenever appropriate; and
continuing their leadership role, within Canada and internationally, in promoting and expanding the use of ADR.
Requirements

3.7 The DND and the CAF must:

provide ADR processes that are flexible and respect the confidentiality concerns of participants and the chain of command as well as applicable legislation;
ensure that all DND employees and CAF members are well informed as to the ADR processes available;
ensure that high quality ADR services are available and accessible by all DND employees and CAF members, employees of associated agencies (e.g., CAF Personnel Support Agency) and the Canadian cadet organizations on a voluntary basis, in a timely manner and without fear of reprisal or retaliation;
provide easily accessible information concerning ADR processes, principles and procedures in order that all DND employees and CAF members may make informed decisions regarding workplace conflict resolution;
ensure that ADR processes are aligned with the ethics and values of the DND and the CAF;
provide standardized ADR training for DND employees and CAF members in conflict resolution skills;
provide standardized training leading to the qualification of ADR practitioners, including mediators; and
ensure that practitioners and mediators are qualified, and adhere to the Code of Ethics for Mediators in the DND and the CF, the Values and Ethics Code for the Public Service and the Code of Conduct for CF Personnel, as applicable.
4. Authorities
Authority Table

4.1 The following table identifies the authorities associated with ADR:

The …	has or have the authority to …

ADM(HR-Mil); and
ADM(HR-Civ)

approve ADR policy and delegate procedures to the DGADR.


DGADR

approve ADR procedures;
implement the Conflict Management Program;
oversee the activities of the Dispute Resolution Centres; and
act as departmental authority for ADR-related activities.


Level 1 Advisors

implement workplace DR policies and procedures for their organizations that are consistent with this DAOD.


managers; and
supervisors

ensure that subordinates are given opportunities to consider the various ADR processes available for addressing their disputes.
5. References
Acts, Regulations, Central Agency Policies and Policy DAOD
Access to Information Act
Canadian Human Rights Act
Privacy Act
Public Service Labour Relations Act
DAOD 5012-0, Harassment Prevention and Resolution
CF Grievance Process
Conflict Management Program - Guidelines for the Use of Alternative Resolution Processes
Other References
Values and Ethics Code for the Public Service
DAOD 5016-0, Standards of Civilian Conduct and Discipline
DAOD 5019-1, Personal Relationships and Fraternization
DAOD 5026-0, Civilian Grievances
CFAO 19-43, Racist Conduct
CPAO 2.02, Human Rights - Discrimination
B-GG-005-027/AF-023, Code of Conduct for CF Personnel
Code of Ethics for Mediators in the DND and the CF
Non-Public Fund Personnel Policy and Procedures Manual, Section 16, Canadian Forces Personnel Support Agency
Page details
 2018-12-13
About this site
National Defence
Contact us
News
Jobs
Government of Canada
All contacts
Departments and agencies
About government
Themes and topics
Jobs
Immigration and citizenship
Travel and tourism
Business
Benefits
Health
Taxes
Environment and natural resources
National security and defence
Culture, history and sport
Policing, justice and emergencies
Transport and infrastructure
Canada and the world
Money and finances
Science and innovation
Indigenous Peoples
Veterans and military
Youth
Manage life events
Government of Canada Corporate
Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy