Skip to main content
Skip to "About government"
Switch to basic HTML version
Language selection
Français
/ Gouvernement du Canada
Search
Search National Defence
Search
Menu
MAIN
MENU
You are here:
Canada.ca National Defence Policies and standards Defence Administrative Orders and Directives Defence Administrative Orders and Directives (DAOD ) - 5000 DAOD 5516 - Table of Contents
DAOD 5516-0, Human Rights
Table of Contents
Introduction
Policy Direction
Consequences
Authorities
References
1. Introduction

Date of Issue: 2013-02-22

Date of Last Modification: 2024-08-08

Application: This DAOD is a directive that applies to employees of the Department of National Defence (DND employees) and an order that applies to officers and non-commissioned members of the Canadian Armed Forces (CAF members).

Supersession:

CFAO 19-40, Human Rights – Discrimination
CPAO 2.02, Human Rights – Discrimination

Approval Authorities:

Assistant Deputy Minister (Human Resources – Civilian) (ADM(HR-Civ))
Chief Professional Conduct and Culture (CPCC)

Enquiries:

Director Civilian Labour Relations (DCLR)
Director Inclusion (DI)
2. Policy Direction
Context

2.1 The Canadian Human Rights Act (CHRA) gives effect in law to the principle of equal opportunity and prohibits discriminatory practices based on any of the following prohibited grounds of discrimination set out in section 3 of the CHRA:

race;
national or ethnic origin;
colour;
religion;
age;
sex (including pregnancy and childbirth);
sexual orientation;
gender identity or expression;
marital status;
family status;
genetic characteristics;
disability (mental or physical); and
conviction for an offence for which a pardon has been granted or in respect of which a record suspension has been ordered.

2.2 A "discriminatory practice" for purposes of the CHRA and the DAOD 5516 series is any discriminatory practice prohibited under sections 5 to 14.1 of the CHRA. Subsection 15(1) of the CHRA sets out practices which are not discriminatory practices under the CHRA.

Policy Statement

2.3 The DND and the CAF are committed to:

ensuring that DND employees and CAF members, and other persons dealing with the DND and the CAF, are treated fairly, respectfully and with dignity;
providing a workplace for DND employees and CAF members that is free from discriminatory practices; and
respecting the rights of DND employees, CAF members, and other persons dealing with the DND and the CAF, that are protected under the CHRA.
Requirements

2.4 The DND and the CAF must:

promote the principles of the CHRA;
inform DND employees and CAF members of their rights and obligations under the CHRA, and of behaviour that constitutes a discriminatory practice;
provide leaders, managers and supervisors with guidance and support to enable them to carry out their responsibilities in preventing discriminatory practices and resolving conflicts;
establish complaint resolution processes; and
monitor the effectiveness of this DAOD and DAOD 5516-1, Human Rights Complaints.

Top of Page

3. Consequences
General

3.1 Should clarification of the policy statement, requirements or authorities set out in this DAOD be required, DND employees and CAF members may seek direction through their channel of communication or chain of command, as appropriate. The anticipated results set out in the policy statement may not be achieved by the DND and the CAF if the requirements specified in this DAOD are not properly implemented. Not achieving the anticipated results could affect the ability of the DND and the CAF to ensure that the CAF is prepared to undertake missions for the protection of Canada and Canadians and the maintenance of international peace and stability.

4. Authorities
Authority Table

4.1 The following table identifies the authorities associated with this DAOD:

The …	has the authority to …


ADM(HR-Civ)



approve human rights policies and procedures for DND employees.




CPCC



approve human rights policies and procedures for CAF members.

5. References
Acts, Regulations, Central Agency Policies and Policy DAOD
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
Canadian Human Rights Act and its regulations
Public Service Labour Relations Act
QR&O Chapter 7, Grievances
Other References
DAOD 5003-0, Restrictions on Duty and Individual Limitations
DAOD 5012-0, Harassment Prevention and Resolution
DAOD 5015-0, Workplace Accommodation
DAOD 5016-0, Standards of Civilian Conduct and Discipline
DAOD 5019-0, Conduct and Performance Deficiencies
DAOD 5026-0, Civilian Grievances
DAOD 5516-1, Human Rights Complaints
Guidelines for Civilian Discipline
Guidelines for Civilian Grievances
Workplace Accommodation – Guidelines
A-PM-007-000/FP-001, Harassment Prevention and Resolution Guidelines
Defence Ethics Programme
Page details
 2024-08-08
About this site
National Defence
Contact us
News
Jobs
Government of Canada
All contacts
Departments and agencies
About government
Themes and topics
Jobs
Immigration and citizenship
Travel and tourism
Business
Benefits
Health
Taxes
Environment and natural resources
National security and defence
Culture, history and sport
Policing, justice and emergencies
Transport and infrastructure
Canada and the world
Money and finances
Science and innovation
Indigenous Peoples
Veterans and military
Youth
Manage life events
Government of Canada Corporate
Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy