Skip to main content
Skip to "About government"
Switch to basic HTML version
Language selection
Français
/ Gouvernement du Canada
Search
Search National Defence
Search
Menu
MAIN
MENU
You are here:
Canada.ca National Defence Policies and standards Defence Administrative Orders and Directives Defence Administrative Orders and Directives (DAOD ) - 5000 DAOD 5025 - Table of Contents
DAOD 5025-0, Classification of Civilian Positions
Table of Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Policy Direction
Authorities
References
1. Introduction

Date of Issue: 2005-11-10

Date of Modification: 2008-03-20

Application: This DAOD is a directive that applies to employees of the Department of National Defence (DND employees) and an order that applies to officers and non-commissioned members of the Canadian Armed Forces (CAF members) who act as managers or supervisors of DND employees.

Supersession:

A-PM-005-001/AG-000, Civilian Classification Policy
CPAO 5.04, Delegation of Classification Authority

Approval Authority: Assistant Deputy Minister (Human Resources - Civilian) (ADM (HR-Civ))

Enquiries: Director Civilian Classification and Organization (DCCO)

2. Definitions

classification standard (norme de classification)

means the same as in the Classification System and Delegation of Authority Policy of the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat (TBS).

classification system (système de classification)

means the same as in the Classification System and Delegation of Authority Policy of the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat (TBS).

concept of work (notion de travail)

means the breakdown of roles and responsibilities and their interrelationship in the delivery of a departmental mandate and organizational business plans.

deputy head (administrateur général)

means the same as in the TBS Classification System and Delegation of Authority Policy.

job (emploi)

means the same as in the TBS Classification System and Delegation of Authority Policy.

level (niveau)

means the same as in the TBS Classification System and Delegation of Authority Policy.

occupational group (groupe professionnel)

means the same as in the TBS Classification System and Delegation of Authority Policy.

position (poste)

means the same as in the TBS Classification System and Delegation of Authority Policy.

work description (description de travail)

means the same as in the TBS Classification System and Delegation of Authority Policy.

work domain (domaine de travail)

means the broadest categorization of the job architecture or concept of work in the DND.

3. Policy Direction
Context

3.1 Treasury Board has delegated authority to the Deputy Minister of National Defence (DM) to classify departmental positions held by DND employees.

3.2 In July 2004, the Public Service Human Resources Management Agency of Canada issued a revised classification policy and guidelines by which:

all work within the public service is to be evaluated to determine its relative value; and
deputy heads may authorize departmental managers and HROs to make classification decisions.

Note - This DAOD does not apply to the occupational groups and levels identified in the following TBS directives:

Directive on the Administration of Leadership Development Programs - Management Trainee Program and Career Assignment Program; and
Directive on Executive (EX) Group Organization and Classification.
Policy Statement

3.3 The DND and the CAF are committed to making classification decisions for all departmental occupational groups and levels in an equitable, consistent, efficient and effective manner in accordance with:

the TBS Classification System and Delegation of Authority Policy;
the Classification System and Delegation of Authority Policy Guidelines of the Canada Public Service Agency (CPSA);
the classification standards; and
this DAOD and the DCCO guidelines and bulletins.
Requirements

3.4 The DND and the CAF shall:

implement the TBS and CPSA classification system;
ensure reliability and relativity of all classification decisions within the DND;
develop and implement collective work descriptions (CWDs) as the norm;
monitor the classification system to ensure its effective management;
ensure that managers and HROs:
meet the criteria for delegated classification authority; and
understand and appropriately apply the Classification System and Delegation of Authority Policy, the Classification System and Delegation of Authority Policy Guidelines and the classification standards
establish and maintain a grievance process to effectively handle classification complaints; and
develop and implement departmental policies, plans and programs in respect of the classification of civilian positions.

Top of Page

4. Authorities
Authority Table

4.1 The following table identifies the authorities associated with this DAOD:

The …	has or have the authority to …


Civilian Human Resources Committee (CHRC)



approve the plans and priorities for the articulation of concepts of work and the development and implementation of CWDs by functional area or occupation;

determine the appropriate functional authorities for work domains in the DND, when this is not clear to the parties; and

approve the business case for reclassification of CWDs, if necessary.




Level 1 Advisors



promote the concept of a CWD organizational environment at the DND;

approve the role of their functional leaders with respect to CWDs;

determine the appropriate CWD authorities for specific work areas;

direct the mandatory application of CWDs as these are developed; and

set conditions and criteria for use of unique positions, ensuring that the use of unique positions does not affect departmental or public service relativity.




DCCO



oversee the implementation of departmental policies, plans and programs in respect of the classification of positions held by DND employees; and

determine whether managers and HROs meet the criteria for delegated classification authority.




managers and HROs



make classification decisions if formally authorized by the DM; and

establish work descriptions for positions held by DND employees within their area of responsibility.

5. References
Acts, Regulations, Central Agency Policies and Policy DAOD
Financial Administration Act, section 6 and paragraph 11.1(1) (b)
Classification System and Delegation of Authority Policy, Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat
Classification System and Delegation of Authority Policy Guidelines, Canada Public Service Agency
Department of National Defence - Delegation of Authorities for Civilian Human Resources Matrix - Executive Group
Instrument of Delegation of Classification Authorities for Civilian Public Service Employees of National Defence
Other References
Public Service Modernization Act
Directive on the Administration of Leadership Development Programs - Management Trainee Program and Career Assignment Program, Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat
Directive on Executive (EX) Group Organization and Classification, Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat
Human Resources Management Modernization, Canada Public Service Agency
Page details
 2018-12-13
About this site
National Defence
Contact us
News
Jobs
Government of Canada
All contacts
Departments and agencies
About government
Themes and topics
Jobs
Immigration and citizenship
Travel and tourism
Business
Benefits
Health
Taxes
Environment and natural resources
National security and defence
Culture, history and sport
Policing, justice and emergencies
Transport and infrastructure
Canada and the world
Money and finances
Science and innovation
Indigenous Peoples
Veterans and military
Youth
Manage life events
Government of Canada Corporate
Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy