Skip to main content
Skip to "About government"
Switch to basic HTML version
Language selection
Français
/ Gouvernement du Canada
Search
Search National Defence
Search
Menu
MAIN
MENU
You are here:
Canada.ca National Defence Policies and standards Defence Administrative Orders and Directives Defence Administrative Orders and Directives (DAOD ) - 5000 DAOD 5031 - Table of Contents
DAOD 5031-0, Learning and Professional Development
Table of Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Policy Direction
Consequences
Authorities
References
1. Introduction

Date of Issue: 2003-01-31

Date of Last Modification: 2025-12-10

Date of Last Review: 2025-12-10

Application: This DAOD is a directive that applies to employees of the Department of National Defence (DND employees) and an order that applies to officers and non-commissioned members of the Canadian Armed Forces (CAF members).

Supersession: DAOD 5038-0, Professional Development

Approval Authorities:

Chief of Military Personnel (CMP); and
Assistant Deputy Minister (Human Resources – Civilian) (ADM(HR-Civ)).

Enquiries:

Administrative Response Centre (ARC)
Director Workforce and Professional Development (DWPD), ADM(HR-Civ)
Director of Staff, Strategic Joint Staff (DOS SJS)
2. Definitions

competency (compétence)

A set of knowledge, skills, abilities and other characteristics that are required by individuals to perform their roles and responsibilities. (Defence Terminology Bank record number 694693)

formal learning (apprentissage formel)

The development of one or more competencies through planned and structured learning activities. (Defence Terminology Bank record number 697266)

informal learning (apprentissage informel)

The development of one or more competencies through unplanned or unstructured learning activities. (Defence Terminology Bank record number 697270)

learning (apprentissage)

The acquisition of knowledge, the development of skills or the influencing of an individual’s attitudes that change their perception, understanding or actions. (Defence Terminology Bank record number 693833)

professional development (perfectionnement professionnel)

A career-long development process consisting of training, education, self-development and employment experience. (Defence Terminology Bank record number 20105)

3. Policy Direction
Context

3.1 Learning, as an internal process unique to each individual that develops competence, is shaped by the social context in which it takes place. Professional development enhances commitment, character and competence, and facilitates continuous learning by enabling opportunities for growth through formal and informal learning activities. By providing continuous learning and professional development opportunities, the DND and the CAF empower their employees and members to enhance their competencies.

Policy Statement

3.2 The DND and the CAF are committed to providing DND employees and CAF members an inclusive learning environment and equitable access to professional development in support of the DND and the CAF mission to defend Canada and Canadian interests at home and abroad.

Common DND and CAF Requirements

3.3 The DND and the CAF must:

plan, manage and align learning and professional development activities in support of the DND and the CAF mission;
establish a shared responsibility for learning and professional development between the DND employee / CAF member, their superiors, and the DND and the CAF;
harmonize the administration of learning and professional development activities using applicable enterprise applications and shared platforms to include the DND and the CAF systems of record;
harmonize delivery of learning and professional development activities using the Defence Learning Network – Learning Management System when appropriate; and
manage distinct institutional professional development frameworks aligned to authorities to address the unique needs of DND employees and CAF members.
4. Consequences
General

4.1 Should clarification of the policy statement, requirements or authorities set out in this DAOD be required, DND employees and CAF members may seek direction through their channel of communication or chain of command, as appropriate. The anticipated results set out in the policy statement may not be achieved by the DND and the CAF if the requirements specified in this DAOD are not properly implemented. Not achieving the anticipated results could affect the ability of the DND and the CAF to ensure that the CAF is prepared to undertake missions for the protection of Canada and Canadians and the maintenance of international peace and stability.

5. Authorities
Authority Table

5.1 The following table identifies the authorities associated with this DAOD:

The …	has the authority to …
CMP
establish CAF Professional Development System (CAFPDS) and CAF Individual Training and Education (IT&E) System governance;
assign CAFPDS and CAF IT&E System responsibilities to appropriate officers or organizations; and
formulate and approve CAFPDS and CAF IT&E System policies and guidance, delegating as appropriate.

ADM(HR-Civ)
establish DND employee learning and professional development governance;
formulate and approve DND employee learning and professional development policies, guidance and programmes; and
assign DND employee learning and professional development responsibilities to appropriate organizations.



DOS SJS


formulate collective training and adventure training policies; and
assign collective training responsibilities to appropriate organizations.

Director General Professional Development Strategic (DGPD Strat)
act as special advisor to the CDS for Profession of Arms and leader development concepts.
6. References
Acts, Regulations, Central Agency Policies and Policy DAOD
Accessible Canada Act
Canadian Human Rights Act
Employment Equity Act
Financial Administration Act
National Defence Act
Strong, Secure, Engaged: Canada’s Defence Policy
Our North, Strong and Free: A Renewed Vision for Canada’s Defence
Policy on People Management, Treasury Board
Directive on Mandatory Training, Treasury Board
Values and Ethics Code for the Public Sector
DAOD 1000-7, Policy Framework for Military Personnel Management
DAOD 1000-9, Policy Framework for Department of National Defence Employee Management
DAOD 1000-10, Policy Framework for Corporate Administration Management
Other References
DAOD 5023-0, Universality of Service
DAOD 5031-2, Canadian Armed Forces Individual Training and Education System
DAOD 5031-8, Canadian Armed Forces Professional Development
DAOD 5031-50, Civilian Learning and Professional Development
DAOD 5516-5, Learning Disability Accommodation during Recruiting, Training and Education
DAOD 8015-0, Canadian Armed Forces Joint Training
Canadian Armed Forces Employment Equity Plan
Canadian Armed Forces Ethos: Trusted to Serve
Canadian Defence Academy Charter
Department of National Defence Accessibility Plan
Department of National Defence and Canadian Forces Code of Values and Ethics
Fighting Spirit: The Profession of Arms in Canada
Instrument of Delegation of Human Resources Authorities for Civilian Public Service Employees of National Defence
Talent Management for Civilian Employees: A Framework
Federal 2SLGBTQI+ Action Plan 2022
Page details
 2026-03-02
About this site
National Defence
Contact us
News
Jobs
Government of Canada
All contacts
Departments and agencies
About government
Themes and topics
Jobs
Immigration and citizenship
Travel and tourism
Business
Benefits
Health
Taxes
Environment and natural resources
National security and defence
Culture, history and sport
Policing, justice and emergencies
Transport and infrastructure
Canada and the world
Money and finances
Science and innovation
Indigenous Peoples
Veterans and military
Youth
Manage life events
Government of Canada Corporate
Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy