Skip to main content
Skip to "About government"
Switch to basic HTML version
Language selection
Français
/ Gouvernement du Canada
Search
Search National Defence
Search
Menu
MAIN
MENU
You are here:
Canada.ca National Defence Policies and standards Defence Administrative Orders and Directives Defence Administrative Orders and Directives (DAOD) - 7000 DAOD 7023 - Table of Contents
DAOD 7023-0, Defence Ethics
Table of Contents
Introduction
Policy Direction
Consequences
Authorities
References
1. Introduction

Date of Issue: 2001-06-26

Date of Last Modification: 2015-02-17

Application: This DAOD is a directive that applies to employees of the Department of National Defence (DND employees) and an order that applies to officers and non-commissioned members of the Canadian Armed Forces (CAF members).

Approval Authorities:

Deputy Minister (DM)
Chief of the Defence Staff (CDS).

Enquiries: Director Defence Ethics Programme (DDEP)

2. Policy Direction
Context

2.1 The DND and the CAF are integral parts of the democratic society of Canada and must reflect its values. Fundamental to the effectiveness of the DND and the CAF is the strength and vitality of its ethical culture. By its nature, national defence involves the possible use of force in response to the full spectrum of defence and security challenges. Canadians expect DND employees and CAF members to consistently perform their duties to the highest ethical standards.

2.2 The Defence Ethics Programme (DEP) provides the DND and the CAF with the focus, frameworks and processes to guide, assess and improve ethical practices and behaviours in the workplace and during operations. The DEP is a values-based programme which aims to ensure sound ethical practices and decision-making by DND employees and CAF members. It also strives to strengthen and protect the ethical integrity of the DND and the CAF as institutions, and that of DND employees and CAF members as individuals.

Policy Statement

2.3 The DND and the CAF have a special responsibility for the defence of Canada, its people and its parliamentary democracy. Discharging this responsibility requires, among other things, a commitment by the DND and its employees, and the CAF and its members, to apply the highest ethical standards in all decisions and actions, whether at home or abroad.

Requirements

2.4 To ensure compliance by DND employees and CAF members with the ethical principles, values and expected behaviours set out in the Department of National Defence and Canadian Forces Code of Values and Ethics (DND and CF Code of Values and Ethics), the DND and the CAF must provide:

a comprehensive framework to assist DND employees and CAF members in maintaining ethical standards;
objective standards for defence values and ethics upon which to base defence leadership and management; and
clarification of ethical expectations to guide conduct and decision-making.

2.5 The DDEP must notify the Chief Review Services (CRS) of any non-compliance with this DAOD.

3. Consequences
Consequences of Non-Compliance

3.1 Non-compliance with this DAOD may have consequences for both the DND and the CAF as institutions, and for DND employees and CAF members as individuals. Suspected non-compliance will be investigated. The nature and severity of the consequences resulting from actual non-compliance will be commensurate with the circumstances of the non-compliance.

Note – In respect of the compliance of DND employees, see the Treasury Board Framework for the Management of Compliance for additional information.

4. Authorities
Authority Table

4.1 The following table identifies the authorities responsible for implementing this DAOD:

The …	has or have the authority to …


DM and the CDS


issue the DND and CF Code of Values and Ethics.



CRS


develop the DEP to implement the DND and CF Code of Values and Ethics, and issue all necessary policies, instructions, guidance and procedures, including a statement of defence ethics and an ethics plan;
establish the Ethics Advisory Board (EAB) as an integral part of the DEP; and
take appropriate action in respect of non-compliance with the DAOD 7023 series.
5. References
Acts, Regulations, Central Agency Policies and Policy DAOD
Access to Information Act
Conflict of Interest Act
Criminal Code
Financial Administration Act
Privacy Act
Public Servants Disclosure Protection Act
QR&O article 4.02, General Responsibilities of Officers
QR&O article 5.01, General Responsibilities of Non-Commissioned Members
QR&O article 15.01, Release of Officers and Non-Commissioned Members
QR&O article 19.15, Prohibition of Reprisals
QR&O article 19.42, Civil Employment
QR&O article 19.43, Directorships and Interest in Companies
Framework for the Management of Compliance, Treasury Board
Management Accountability Framework, Treasury Board
Communications Policy of the Government of Canada, Treasury Board
Federal Identity Program Policy, Treasury Board
Policy on Conflict of Interest and Post-Employment, Treasury Board
Policy on Government Security, Treasury Board
Policy on Harassment Prevention and Resolution, Treasury Board
Directive on the Harassment Complaint Process, Treasury Board
Values and Ethics Code for the Public Sector, Treasury Board
Other References
DAOD 5012-0, Harassment Prevention and Resolution
DAOD 5016-0, Standards of Civilian Conduct and Discipline
DAOD 5019-2, Administrative Review
DAOD 5026-0, Civilian Grievances
DAOD 5046-0, Alternative Dispute Resolution
DAOD 7021-0, Conflict of Interest and Post-Employment
DAOD 7021-1, Conflict of Interest
DAOD 7021-2, Post-Employment
DAOD 7021-3, Acceptance of Gifts, Hospitality and Other Benefits
DAOD 7021-4, Public Solicitations, Sponsorships and Donations (title is under review)
DAOD 7023-1, Defence Ethics Programme
DAOD 7024-0, Disclosure of Wrongdoings in the Workplace
DAOD 7024-1, Internal Procedures for Disclosure of Wrongdoings in the Workplace
A-PA-005-000/AP-001, Duty with Honour: The Profession of Arms in Canada
DCCP Directive 6004-12, Dual Remuneration
Department of National Defence and Canadian Forces Code of Values and Ethics
Department of National Defence and Canadian Forces Ethics Plan (DND and CF Ethics Plan) (available in paper copy only)
Statement of Defence Ethics
Procurement Administration Manual
Guideline for the Use of Alternative Dispute Resolution Processes
Disclosure of Wrongdoing – Guidelines for the Department of National Defence (DND) Managers and Employees, and Canadian Armed Forces (CAF) Supervisors and Members
Page details
 2022-07-25
About this site
National Defence
Contact us
News
Jobs
Government of Canada
All contacts
Departments and agencies
About government
Themes and topics
Jobs
Immigration and citizenship
Travel and tourism
Business
Benefits
Health
Taxes
Environment and natural resources
National security and defence
Culture, history and sport
Policing, justice and emergencies
Transport and infrastructure
Canada and the world
Money and finances
Science and innovation
Indigenous Peoples
Veterans and military
Youth
Manage life events
Government of Canada Corporate
Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy