Skip to main content
Skip to "About government"
Switch to basic HTML version
Language selection
Français
/ Gouvernement du Canada
Search
Search National Defence
Search
Menu
MAIN
MENU
You are here:
Canada.ca National Defence Policies and standards Defence Administrative Orders and Directives Defence Administrative Orders and Directives (DAOD ) - 5000 DAOD 5039 - Table of Contents
DAOD 5039-3, Advancement of English and French
Table of Contents
Introduction
Definition
Abbreviations
Overview
Process
Compliance and Consequences
Responsibilities
References
1. Introduction

Date of Issue: 2010-07-12

Date of Last Modification: 2024-02-13

Application: This DAOD is a directive that applies to employees of the Department of National Defence (DND employees) and an order that applies to officers and non‑commissioned members of the Canadian Armed Forces (CAF members).

Approval Authorities:

Chief Professional Conduct and Culture (CPCC)
Assistant Deputy Minister (Human Resources – Civilian) (ADM(HR-Civ))

Enquiries: Director Official Languages (DOL)

Top of Page

2. Definition

official language minority community (communauté de langue officielle en situation minoritaire)

An English-speaking community in Quebec or a French-speaking community in Canada outside Quebec. (Defence Terminology Bank record number 43160)

Top of Page

3. Abbreviations
Abbreviation	Complete Word or Phrase
CO	commanding officer
COL	coordinator of official languages
comd	Commander

L1	level one advisor

NCR	National Capital Region

OL	official language
OLA	Official Languages Act
OLMC	official language minority community


Top of Page

4. Overview
Context

4.1 The OLA provides that English and French are the OLs of Canada and confirms their equal status within federal institutions. Part VII of the OLA focuses on the duties and responsibilities of the Government of Canada with regard to the advancement of English and French. Subsection 41(1) specifically sets out the commitments of the Government of Canada to:

enhance the vitality of OLMCs in Canada, and support and assist their development; and
foster the full recognition and use of both English and French in Canadian society.

4.2 Subsection 41(2) of the OLA provides that every federal institution has the duty to ensure that positive measures are taken for the implementation of the commitments set out in subsection 41(1). Section 42 of the OLA provides that the Minister of Canadian Heritage, in consultation with other ministers of the Crown, must encourage and promote a coordinated approach by federal institutions to the implementation of the commitments.

4.3 Any measure contributing to the development of OLMCs, and to the fostering of full recognition and use of both English and French in Canadian society, constitutes a positive measure. By remaining attentive to the needs of OLMCs and by demonstrating leadership, the DND and the CAF are more capable of identifying positive measures.

Purpose

4.4 The purpose of this DAOD is to set the conditions under which the DND and the CAF will meet the commitments of the Government of Canada under Part VII of the OLA.

Stakeholders

4.5 The following are the DND and CAF stakeholders responsible for taking positive measures to implement the commitments set out in subsection 41(1) of the OLA:

L1s;
Comds and COs;
DND managers; and
DND employees and CAF members responsible for the development, modification or cancellation of policies and programs.

Top of Page

5. Process

5.1 The DND and CAF OL champions and functional authorities are responsible for the strategic-level implementation of the DND and CAF OL Program, including compliance with Part VII of the OLA.

5.2 The DOL, on behalf of the DND and CAF OL champions and functional authorities, provides guidance and trains L1 COLs so that they can support their L1 in fulfilling the obligations under Part VII.

5.3 All DND and CAF stakeholders must ascertain, plan, implement and report on positive measures to fulfill their obligations under Part VII in accordance with the DOL Framework for the Implementation of Part VII of the OLA.

Enhancing the Vitality of OLMCs in Canada and Supporting and Assisting their Development

5.4 With bases and wings in various regions across Canada, the DND and the CAF have a unique opportunity to support OLMCs and enhance the vitality of both OLs in each region. In order to determine positive measures, it is critical to maintain communications with OLMCs to understand their needs and concerns.

5.5 Interactions with OLMCs will be conducted in one of two ways, depending on whether the organization is located in the NCR or elsewhere in Canada:

within the NCR, DOL coordinates interaction with the OLMCs; and
outside the NCR, base and wing representatives meet with OLMC representatives.

5.6 The following are examples of positive measures that enhance the vitality of OLMCs in Canada and support and assist their development:

conducting events that give CAF members and their families the opportunity to become involved with local OLMCs;
publishing directories of services and programs available to CAF members and their families in the minority language (e.g. local doctors and dentists); and
involving OLMC representatives in base and wing “open house” events to provide outreach to CAF members and their families.
Fostering the Full Recognition and Use of Both OLs in Canadian Society

5.7 The promotion of both OLs within Canadian society is an obligation of all DND and CAF organizations. Organizations must take the opportunity to use both OLs when addressing the public domestically or internationally. All organizations of the DND and the CAF are involved in events that provide the opportunity to promote both OLs. Each year, the DND and the CAF organize promotional events within Canada and internationally where there is opportunity to promote Canadian culture and English and French in Canadian society.

5.8 The DND and the CAF also participate in events at the regional and national levels, as well as events of a similar scope led by other government institutions. The promotion of both OLs must be integrated within these events.

5.9 The following are examples of positive measures that foster the full recognition and use of both OLs in Canadian society:

addresses, announcements and other communications to the general public that are provided in both OLs;
base or wing events that are open to the general public to celebrate the minority language culture;
base or wing theatres that are open to the general public to offer movies in the minority language; and
support by CAF members for Remembrance Day and Veterans’ Week events at local English and French schools

Top of Page

6. Compliance and Consequences
Compliance

6.1 DND employees and CAF members must comply with this DAOD. Should clarification of the policies or instructions set out in this DAOD be required, DND employees and CAF members may seek direction through their channel of communication or chain of command, as appropriate. Managers and military supervisors have the primary responsibility for and means of ensuring the compliance of their DND employees and CAF members with this DAOD.

Consequences of Non-Compliance

6.2 DND employees and CAF members are accountable to their respective managers and military supervisors for any failure to comply with the direction set out in this DAOD. Non‑compliance with this DAOD may result in administrative action, including the imposition of disciplinary measures, for a DND employee, and administrative or disciplinary action, or both, for a CAF member. Non‑compliance may also result in the imposition of liability on the part of Her Majesty in right of Canada, DND employees and CAF members.

Note – In respect to the compliance of DND employees, see the Treasury Board Framework for the Management of Compliance for additional information.

Top of Page

7. Responsibilities
Responsibility Table

7.1 The following table identifies the responsibilities associated with this DAOD:

The ...	is or are responsible for ...


L1s


planning, implementing and reporting on positive measures in support of the obligations of the DND and the CAF under Part VII of the OLA, in accordance with the Framework for the Implementation of Part VII of the OLA and other DOL guidance.



DND and CAF OL champions and functional authorities


supporting the Deputy Minister and the Chief of the Defence Staff in ensuring that the DND and the CAF meet the commitments of the Government of Canada under Part VII of the OLA.



DOL


developing and maintaining policies, instructions and directives for the purpose of complying with Part VII of the OLA;
providing guidance to all DND and CAF stakeholders on the implementation of Part VII, primarily through the network of L1 COLs;
organizing training and awareness sessions on Part VII;
measuring performance of the DND and the CAF in achieving the commitments set out in Part VII; and
reporting to central agencies as required on the performance of the DND and the CAF in achieving the commitments set out in Part VII..

L1 COLs
providing advice to their L1 regarding the governance and implementation of Part VII of the OLA, in accordance with DOL guidance; and
providing advice to subordinate organizations regarding the implementation of Part VII, in accordance with the direction of their L1.

Comds, COs and DND managers

planning, implementing and reporting on positive measures in support of the obligations of the DND and the CAF under Part VII of the OLA, in accordance with the direction of their L1.

DND employees and CAF members responsible for policy and program development

systematically taking into account the commitments set out in Part VII of the OLA when creating, reviewing, modifying or cancelling policies or programs.

DND employees and CAF members

taking  advantage of opportunities to:
enhance the vitality of OLMCs in Canada, and support and assist their development; and
foster the full recognition and use of both OLs in Canadian society.

Top of Page

8. References
Acts, Regulations, Central Agency Policies and Policy DAOD
Official Languages Act
Framework for the Management of Compliance, Treasury Board
Policy on Official Languages, Treasury Board
DAOD 5039‑0, Official Languages
Other References
Framework for the Implementation of Part VII of the OLA
Guide for Federal Institutions on Part VII (Promotion of French and English) of the Official Languages Act, Canadian Heritage
DOL intranet site
Page details
 2024-02-12
About this site
National Defence
Contact us
News
Jobs
Government of Canada
All contacts
Departments and agencies
About government
Themes and topics
Jobs
Immigration and citizenship
Travel and tourism
Business
Benefits
Health
Taxes
Environment and natural resources
National security and defence
Culture, history and sport
Policing, justice and emergencies
Transport and infrastructure
Canada and the world
Money and finances
Science and innovation
Indigenous Peoples
Veterans and military
Youth
Manage life events
Government of Canada Corporate
Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy