Skip to main content
Skip to "About government"
Switch to basic HTML version
Language selection
Français
/ Gouvernement du Canada
Search
Search National Defence
Search
Menu
MAIN
MENU
You are here:
Canada.ca National Defence Policies and standards Defence Administrative Orders and Directives Defence Administrative Orders and Directives (DAOD ) - 5000 DAOD 5008 - Table of Contents
DAOD 5008-1, Use of Departmental Premises and Equipment, and Electronic Networks, for Bargaining Agent or Union Business
Table of Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Overview
Use of Departmental Premises and Equipment
Use of Bulletin Boards
Use of Electronic Networks
Responsibilities
References
1. Introduction

Date of Issue: 2005-04-01

Application: This is a directive that applies to employees of the Department of National Defence (DND employees) and an order that applies to officers and non-commissioned members of the Canadian Armed Forces (CAF members) who act as managers or supervisors of DND employees.

Approval Authority: This DAOD is issued under the authority of the Assistant Deputy Minister
(Human Resources - Civilian) (ADM(HR-Civ)).

Enquiries: Director General Labour Relations and Compensation (DGLRC)

2. Definitions

delegated manager (gestionnaire délégataire)

Delegated manager means a manager or supervisor with delegated powers or functions in relation to human resources management, pursuant to Subsection 12.2(1) of the Financial Administration Act, and as identified in the Department of National Defence Instrument of Delegation of Labour Relations Authorities.

departmental equipment (équipement du ministère)

Departmental equipment means any equipment which is the property of the Department, including:

computers;
laptops;
wireless communication devices;
personal digital assistants;
telephones;
fax machines;
photocopiers;
printers;
projection equipment; and
office supplies.

departmental premises (locaux du ministère)

Departmental premises means the premises controlled by the DND or the CAF, such as vessels, structures and attendant land owned or leased by the DND or otherwise occupied by the DND or the CAF.

electronic networks (réseaux électroniques)

Electronic networks means groups of computers and computer systems that can communicate with each other. These networks include the following:

Internet;
networks internal to the DND and the CAF (Defence Intranet); and
public and private networks external to the DND and the CAF.
3. Overview
Context

3.1 The DND may permit bargaining agents, unions or DND employees to use departmental premises for bargaining agent or union business. Such use does not constitute unfair labour practice in accordance with paragraph 186(3)(b) of the Public Service Labour Relations Act (PSLRA). The DND considers the use of electronic networks and departmental equipment permissible in this context.

Purpose

3.2 In the interest of promoting constructive labour-management relations, this DAOD outlines the conditions under which delegated managers may approve bargaining agent, union or DND employee requests for the use of departmental premises and equipment, and electronic networks, for bargaining agent or union business.

3.3 This DAOD outlines the conditions and process for obtaining and providing such approval.

Approval Authority

3.4 Only delegated managers may approve requests by bargaining agents, unions or DND employees to use departmental premises or equipment, or electronic networks, for bargaining agent or union business.

Conditions

3.5 Bargaining agents, unions and DND employees must obtain approval from a delegated manager before using departmental premises and equipment, and electronic networks, for bargaining agent or union business. The DND cannot insist upon the bargaining agent, union or DND employee using their departmental premises or equipment, or electronic networks, for bargaining agent or union business.

3.6 Before approving requests for the use of departmental premises and equipment, and electronic networks, delegated managers shall:

consider the:
feasibility and appropriateness of the request;
availability of the premises, equipment or electronic networks; and
monitoring requirements that would result from the authorization;
ensure that the use is not:
contrary to the interests of the DND;
related to collective bargaining, strike or post-strike matters (excluding ratification votes); and
for the purpose of recruitment to the employee organization;
ensure that:
the use is consistent with security and safety regulations;
departmental policies and directives are complied with; and
in the case of a request by a bargaining agent or union representative, the representative agrees in writing to assume the responsibility for any additional costs incurred, including those associated with the repair of damaged departmental premises or the repair or replacement of damaged departmental equipment.
Request in Writing

3.7 The bargaining agent, union or DND employee who wishes to use departmental premises or equipment, or electronic networks, makes the request in writing, agreeing to accept the conditions outlined in this DAOD.

Consequences in Case of Breach

3.8 Inappropriate or unacceptable use of departmental premises and equipment, and electronic networks, may be subject to administrative and corrective action, up to and including disciplinary measures in the case of DND employees. The Guidelines for Civilian Discipline provide direction on disciplinary measures and are found on the DGLRC website.

Storage of Literature

3.9 Subject to the conditions outlined in this DAOD, delegated managers may give permission to a bargaining agent or union to store literature within departmental premises.

4. Use of Departmental Premises and Equipment
Meetings Outside Working Hours

4.1 Subject to the conditions outlined in this DAOD, delegated managers may give permission to a bargaining agent, union or DND employee to use departmental premises outside working hours.

Meetings During Working Hours

4.2 Subject to the conditions outlined in this DAOD, delegated managers may give permission to a bargaining agent, union or DND employee to use departmental premises during working hours if circumstances are such that it is virtually impossible to convene a meeting outside working hours.

Equipment

4.3 Subject to the conditions outlined in this DAOD, delegated managers may give permission to a bargaining agent, union or DND employee to use departmental equipment either outside or during working hours.

5. Use of Bulletin Boards
Providing Space

5.1 In accordance with applicable collective agreements, delegated managers shall provide reasonable space on departmental bulletin boards for posting notices submitted by a bargaining agent or union.

Approval and Removal of Notices

5.2 The following table provides information on specific approval required before posting notices on bulletin boards:

Notices that originate from the headquarters of a ...	require the approval of the ...


bargaining agent or union



Labour Relations Division of the Treasury Board.




component of a bargaining agent or union



DGLRC.

5.3 Managers and supervisors shall remove notices or refuse to post notices that originate from a bargaining agent or a union, if appropriate approval has not been obtained prior to posting the notice.

Language Requirements

5.4 Posted notices must conform to the requirements of the Official Languages Act.

6. Use of Electronic Networks
Approval of Notices

6.1 The posting of notices on electronic networks is subject to the criteria listed under the Approval and Removal of Notices and Language Requirements blocks under the Use of Bulletin Boards map.

Acceptable Use

6.2 The use of electronic networks is subject to the conditions outlined in DAOD 6002-2, Acceptable Use of the Internet, Defence Intranet and Other Electronic Networks, and Computers.

6.3 Inappropriate or unacceptable use as characterized in DAOD 6002-2 may be subject to administrative and corrective action, up to and including disciplinary measures in the case of DND employees. The Guidelines for Civilian Discipline provide direction on disciplinary measures and are found on the DGLRC website.

Providing Electronic Networks

6.4 Subject to the conditions outlined in this DAOD, delegated managers may give limited access to electronic networks to a bargaining agent, union or DND employee in order to facilitate communications between the bargaining agent or union and its members, as well as between the bargaining agent or union and management.

Top of Page

7. Responsibilities
Responsibility Table

7.1 The following table identifies the responsibilities associated with the use of departmental premises and equipment, and electronic networks, for bargaining agent or union business:

The ...	is or are responsible for ...


DGLRC


establishing instructions and guidelines regarding the bargaining agent, union and DND employees use of departmental premises and equipment, and electronic networks; and
providing advice to the Civilian Human Resource Service Centre (CHRSC), where required.



CHRSC


providing advice and assistance to delegated managers on the application of this DAOD;
consulting with the DGLRC where required; and
maintaining records of approved requests.



delegated managers


consulting:
the applicable collective agreements for provisions on the bargaining agent or union use of departmental bulletin boards; and
with the CHRSC before authorizing bargaining agent, union or DND employee use of departmental premises and equipment, and electronic networks;
providing a copy of the approved request to the CHRSC; and
monitoring the use of departmental premises and equipment, and electronic networks, for bargaining agent or union business.



DND employees


obtaining approval from a delegated manager before using departmental premises and equipment, and electronic networks, for bargaining agent or union business.
8. References
Acts, Regulations, Central Agency Policies and Policy DAOD
Financial Administration Act
Official Languages Act
Public Service Labour Relations Act
DAOD 6002-2, Acceptable Use of the Internet, Defence Intranet and Other Electronic Networks, and Computers
Staff Relations - Policies and Publications, Treasury Board
Applicable collective agreements
Guidelines for Civilian Discipline
Instrument of Delegation of Labour Relations and Compensation Authorities
Other References
DAOD 5005-1, Governance of Civilian Human Resources Management
DND Strike Manual
Page details
 2018-12-13
About this site
National Defence
Contact us
News
Jobs
Government of Canada
All contacts
Departments and agencies
About government
Themes and topics
Jobs
Immigration and citizenship
Travel and tourism
Business
Benefits
Health
Taxes
Environment and natural resources
National security and defence
Culture, history and sport
Policing, justice and emergencies
Transport and infrastructure
Canada and the world
Money and finances
Science and innovation
Indigenous Peoples
Veterans and military
Youth
Manage life events
Government of Canada Corporate
Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy