Skip to main content
Skip to "About government"
Switch to basic HTML version
Language selection
Français
/ Gouvernement du Canada
Search
Search Canada.ca
Search
Menu
MAIN
MENU
You are here:
Canada.ca Public Service Commission of Canada Public service recruitment programs Public service student recruitment programs
Federal Student Work Experience Program
Looking for a job? Explore the possibilities in the federal public service

Discover the many career paths that the Government of Canada has to offer across the country. Gain meaningful experience working on projects and initiatives that impact the lives of Canadians. Join the top student employer in Canada: we’re committed to diversity and inclusion!

Curious about how much you could earn? Find out about rates of pay.

You’re eligible if you meet these 3 criteria:

you’re registered as a full-time student in a secondary or post-secondary accredited academic institution
this includes persons with disabilities considered to have full-time status by their academic institution, and participants in adult secondary-level education and retraining programs under the authority of an accredited academic institution
you meet the minimum age requirement in the province or territory of work
you’ll return to full-time studies in the next academic term, or if you’re in your final year of studies, you must have been previously employed under either the Federal Student Work Experience Program, the Co-op/Internship Program or the Research Affiliate Program

Learn more about student eligibility.

Note: Preference will be given to Canadian citizens and permanent residents who meet the job requirements.

Apply here

Ongoing Student Recruitment Inventory

Our largest student inventory is open year-round, and available to over 200 departments and agencies. It offers full-time and part-time work opportunities in a wide variety of fields including sciences, trades, administration, information technology, finance and more!

Apply!
Specialized inventories

Looking for something specific? These opportunities may be of interest to you. Apply before the closing date!

Treaty Pay Summer Job for Indigenous Students (Summer 2026)
Student Guide Program in France (Fall 2026)
Women, Indigenous Peoples, persons with disabilities and members of visible minorities

Be part of a public service that represents and includes the diverse identities, cultures, perspectives and experiences that make up Canada. Some student jobs and programs are only open to people who have self-declared as a member of an employment equity group. When you apply, you can indicate (self-declare) if you identify as a woman, an Indigenous person, a member of a visible minority, or a person with a disability.

For more information, visit canada.ca/self-declare.

How it works
Your application will be included in the student inventory
Throughout the year, managers will request applications that match their job requirements
You’ll be notified by email if you’re matched with a job opportunity, or if your application status changes
If your application is selected for further consideration, you’ll be contacted by a manager for a test and/or interview
Update the information in your application regularly to make sure you continue to be matched with the right job opportunities for you

If you have accommodation needs, inform the person who invited you for a test or an interview as soon as possible. This information will be kept confidential.

Learn more about accommodation measures.
Learn more about the Security Screening process.
Once you're hired

As a student working for the federal public service, several networking, training and mentoring opportunities, and tailored support services are available to you. Be sure to talk to your manager to learn how to register!

Career Pathways for Students with Disabilities

This is a national initiative under the Federal Student Work Experience Program for students who have self-declared as persons with disabilities.

It provides support to employees with disabilities during their work term with the federal public service career. It features an onboarding process, training, activities and support services for both students and hiring managers.

Make sure to fill out the self-declaration section in your application!

Career Pathways for Indigenous Students

This is a national initiative under the Federal Student Work Experience Program for students who have self-declared as Indigenous.

It provides support to First Nations, Inuit and Métis students during their work term with the federal public service. It features an onboarding process, training, mentoring and support services for both students and hiring managers.

Make sure to fill out the self-declaration section in your application!

The Federal Youth Network


This is a national network for young and new public servants across Canada. It fosters and promotes engagement, innovation and career development through a range of activities and training opportunities.

Contact us

Contact us at cfp.pfete-fswep.psc@cfp-psc.gc.ca for more information about the Federal Student Work Experience Program.

Other opportunities for students
Find government jobs
Government of Canada Co-op placements and internships
Find a student research job in the Government of Canada
Other Government of Canada opportunities for students and graduates
Government of Canada jobs for Indigenous people
Start a career as a policy leader
Page details
 2024-02-23
About this site
Contact us
General enquiries
GC Jobs
Second language evaluation
Government of Canada
All contacts
Departments and agencies
About government
Themes and topics
Jobs
Immigration and citizenship
Travel and tourism
Business
Benefits
Health
Taxes
Environment and natural resources
National security and defence
Culture, history and sport
Policing, justice and emergencies
Transport and infrastructure
Canada and the world
Money and finances
Science and innovation
Indigenous Peoples
Veterans and military
Youth
Manage life events
Government of Canada Corporate
Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy