MAIN CONT DIV START

Assented to 2013-12-12

An Act respecting the Federal Public Sector Labour Relations and Employment Board

[Enacted by section 365 of chapter 40 of the Statutes of Canada, 2013, in force November 1, 2014, see SI/2014-84.]


Short Title


Marginal note:Short title

1 This Act may be cited as the Federal Public Sector Labour Relations and Employment Board Act.


Interpretation


Marginal note:Definitions

2 The following definitions apply in this Act.


Designation of Minister


Marginal note:Power of Governor in Council

3 The Governor in Council may, by order, designate any federal minister, other than a member of the Treasury Board, to be the Minister referred to in this Act.


Federal Public Sector Labour Relations and Employment Board



Continuance and Composition


Marginal note:Continuance of Board


Appointment of Members


Marginal note:Qualifications

Marginal note:Appointments of other members from list

Marginal note:Residence of full-time members

7 A full-time member must reside in the National Capital Region as it is described in the schedule to the National Capital Act or within any distance of it that the Governor in Council may determine.

Marginal note:Appointment of members

Marginal note:Oath or solemn affirmation

9 Before beginning their duties or functions, a person who is appointed as a member of the Board must take an oath or make a solemn affirmation in the following form before a commissioner of oaths or other person having authority to administer oaths or solemn affirmations:

I, , do swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will faithfully, truly and impartially, to the best of my judgment, skill and ability, execute and perform the office of member (or Chairperson or Vice-chairperson) of the Federal Public Sector Labour Relations and Employment Board.


Remuneration


Marginal note:Remuneration

10 Every member and former member referred to in subsection 8(4)


Application of Other Acts


Marginal note:Application of Public Service Superannuation Act

11 A full-time member is deemed to be employed in the public service for the purposes of the Public Service Superannuation Act.

Marginal note:Application of certain Acts

12 A member is deemed to be an employee for the purposes of the Government Employees Compensation Act and to be employed in the federal public administration for the purposes of regulations made under section 9 of the Aeronautics Act.


Head Office and Meetings


Marginal note:Head office

13 The Board’s head office is to be in the National Capital Region as it is described in the schedule to the National Capital Act.

Marginal note:Services and facilities

14 In exercising its powers and performing its duties and functions, the Board may use any services and facilities of departments, boards and agencies of the Government of Canada that are appropriate for the Board’s operation.

Marginal note:Meetings

Marginal note:Quorum

16 The Chairperson, one Vice-chairperson and a majority of the other full-time members constitute a quorum at a meeting of the Board.

Marginal note:Attendance of part-time members at meetings

17 A part-time member is not entitled to attend a meeting of the Board, but may attend at the Chairperson’s invitation.

Marginal note:Decision of majority

18 A decision of a majority of the Board’s members who are present at a meeting of the Board is a decision of the Board.


Board’s Powers, Duties and Functions


Marginal note:Powers, duties and functions

19 The Board is to exercise the powers and perform the duties and functions that are conferred or imposed on it by this Act or any other Act of Parliament.

Marginal note:Powers of Board

20 The Board has, in relation to any matter before it, the power to

Marginal note:Frivolous matters

21 The Board may dismiss summarily any matter that in its opinion is trivial, frivolous, vexatious or was made in bad faith.

Marginal note:Determination without oral hearing

22 The Board may decide any matter before it without holding an oral hearing.

Marginal note:General power to assist parties

23 The Board or a member of the Board or an employee of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada who is authorized by the Board may, if the parties agree, assist the parties in resolving any issues in dispute at any stage of a proceeding and by any means that the Board considers appropriate, without prejudice to the Board’s power to determine issues that have not been settled.

Marginal note:Delegation by Board

24 The Board may


Chairperson


Marginal note:Chairperson’s duties

25 The Chairperson has supervision over and direction of the Board’s work, including

Marginal note:Delegation by Chairperson

26 The Chairperson may authorize a Vice-chairperson to exercise any of the Chairperson’s powers or perform any of the Chairperson’s duties or functions, including powers, duties or functions delegated to the Chairperson by the Board.

Marginal note:Acting Chairperson

28 [Repealed before coming into force, 2014, c. 20, s. 471]

29 [Repealed before coming into force, 2014, c. 20, s. 471]


Experts


Marginal note:Experts and advisors

30 The Chief Administrator of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada may engage on a temporary basis the services of mediators and other experts to assist the Board in an advisory capacity and, subject to the Governor in Council’s approval, fix their remuneration.


Protection


Marginal note:Board members and experts not compellable

Marginal note:No disclosure of notes and drafts

32 Notes or draft orders or decisions of the Board or of any of its members are not to be disclosed without the consent of the person who made them.

Marginal note:Immunity from proceedings  — Board members, experts and others


Review and Enforcement of Orders and Decisions


Marginal note:No review by court

Marginal note:Filing of Board’s orders in Federal Court


Regulations


Marginal note:Regulations

36 The Board may make regulations respecting


Panels


Marginal note:Panels

Marginal note:Member’s death or incapacity

Marginal note:Powers, rights and privileges

39 A panel has all of the Board’s powers, rights and privileges with respect to any matter assigned to the panel.

Marginal note:Panel’s decision


Witness Fees


Marginal note:Payment of witness fees

41 A person who is summoned by the Board to attend as a witness at any of its proceedings is entitled to receive fees and allowances for so attending that are equal to those to which the person would be entitled if they were summoned to attend before the Federal Court.


Annual Report


Marginal note:Obligation to prepare report


RELATED PROVISIONS



AMENDMENTS NOT IN FORCE


MAIN CONT DIV END


Page Details
