MAIN CONT DIV START

Assented to 2003-11-07

An Act respecting labour relations in the federal public sector

[Enacted by section 2 of chapter 22 of the Statutes of Canada, 2003; preamble, sections 1 to 3 and Part 1, in force April 1, 2005, see SI/2005-22; Part 2, other than subparagraph 209(1)(c)(ii), paragraph 211(b) and section 231, in force April 1, 2005, see SI/2005-23; Parts 3 and 4 in force April 1, 2005, see SI/2005-24; subparagraph 209(1)(c)(ii), paragraph 211(b) and section 231 in force December 31, 2005, see SI/2005-123.]


Preamble


Recognizing that

the public service labour-management regime must operate in a context where protection of the public interest is paramount;

effective labour-management relations represent a cornerstone of good human resource management and that collaborative efforts between the parties, through communication and sustained dialogue, improve the ability of the public service to serve and protect the public interest;

collective bargaining ensures the expression of diverse views for the purpose of establishing terms and conditions of employment;

the Government of Canada is committed to fair, credible and efficient resolution of matters arising in respect of terms and conditions of employment;

the Government of Canada recognizes that public service bargaining agents represent the interests of employees in collective bargaining and participate in the resolution of workplace issues and rights disputes;

commitment from the employer and bargaining agents to mutual respect and harmonious labour-management relations is essential to a productive and effective public service;

NOW, THEREFORE, Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and House of Commons of Canada, enacts as follows:


Short Title


Marginal note:Short title

1 This Act may be cited as the Federal Public Sector Labour Relations Act.


Interpretation


Marginal note:Definitions

Marginal note:Descriptive cross- references

3 If, in any provision of this Act, a reference to another provision of this Act is followed by words in parentheses that are descriptive of the subject-matter of that other provision, the words in parentheses form no part of the provision in which they occur and are deemed to have been inserted for convenience of reference only.


PART 1Labour Relations



Interpretation


Marginal note:Definitions


DIVISION 1Employee Freedoms


Marginal note:Employee freedoms

5 Every employee is free to join the employee organization of his or her choice and to participate in its lawful activities.


DIVISION 2Management Rights


Marginal note:Right of Treasury Board preserved

6 Nothing in this Act is to be construed as affecting the right or authority of the Treasury Board under paragraph 7(1)(b) of the Financial Administration Act.

Marginal note:Right of employer preserved

7 Nothing in this Act is to be construed as affecting the right or authority of the Treasury Board or a separate agency to determine the organization of those portions of the federal public administration for which it represents Her Majesty in right of Canada as employer or to assign duties to and to classify positions and persons employed in those portions of the federal public administration.

Marginal note:Right of Commissioner of Royal Canadian Mounted Police preserved

7.1 Nothing in this Act is to be construed as affecting the right or authority of the Commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police under the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Act to ensure that police operations are effective.


DIVISION 3Consultation Committees and Co-Development


Marginal note:Consultation committee

8 Each deputy head must, in consultation with the bargaining agents representing employees in the portion of the federal public administration for which he or she is deputy head, establish a consultation committee consisting of representatives of the deputy head and the bargaining agents for the purpose of exchanging information and obtaining views and advice on issues relating to the workplace that affect those employees, which issues may include, among other things,

Marginal note:Meaning of co-development of workplace improvements

9 For the purpose of this Division, co-development of workplace improvements means the consultation between the parties on workplace issues and their participation in the identification of workplace problems and the development and analysis of solutions to those problems with a view to adopting mutually agreed to solutions.

Marginal note:Co-development of workplace improvements

10 The employer and a bargaining agent, or a deputy head and a bargaining agent, may engage in co-development of workplace improvements.

Marginal note:National Joint Council


DIVISION 4Federal Public Sector Labour Relations and Employment Board


Marginal note:Administration of Act

12 The Board administers this Act and it may exercise the powers and perform the duties and functions that are conferred or imposed on it by this Act, or as are incidental to the attainment of the objects of this Act, including the making of orders requiring compliance with this Act, with regulations made under it or with decisions made in respect of a matter coming before the Board.

Marginal note:Adjudication services

13 The Board is to provide adjudication services that consist of the hearing of applications and complaints made under this Part and Division 1 of Part 2.1, the referral of grievances to adjudication in accordance with Part 2 and Division 2 of Part 2.1 and the hearing of matters brought before the Board under Part 3.

Marginal note:Mediation services

14 The Board is to provide mediation services that consist of

15 [Repealed, 2014, c. 20, s. 481]

Marginal note:Powers

16 The Board has, in relation to any matter before it, the power to

17 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

18 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

19 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

20 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

21 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

22 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

23 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

24 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

25 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

26 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

27 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

28 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

29 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

30 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

31 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

32 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

33 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

34 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

35 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

36 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

37 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

38 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 367]

Marginal note:Authority to make regulations

39 The Board may make regulations concerning

40 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 369]

41 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 369]

Marginal note:Scope of orders

42 In making an order or a decision, or doing any other thing in relation to any person under this Act, the Board may do so either generally or in any particular case or class of cases.

Marginal note:Review of orders and decisions

44 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 370, as amended by 2013, c. 40, s. 467]

45 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 370, as amended by 2013, c. 40, s. 467]

46 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 370, as amended by 2013, c. 40, s. 467]

47 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 370, as amended by 2013, c. 40, s. 467]

48 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 370, as amended by 2013, c. 40, s. 467]

49 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 370, as amended by 2013, c. 40, s. 467]

50 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 370, as amended by 2013, c. 40, s. 467]

51 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 370, as amended by 2013, c. 40, s. 467]

52 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 370, as amended by 2013, c. 40, s. 467]

53 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 298]


DIVISION 5Bargaining Rights



Certification of Bargaining Agents



Application for Certification


Marginal note:Right to apply

54 Subject to section 55, an employee organization within the meaning of paragraph (a) of the definition employee organization in subsection 2(1) that seeks to be certified as bargaining agent for a group of employees that it considers constitutes a unit that is appropriate for collective bargaining may apply to the Board, in accordance with the regulations, for certification as bargaining agent for the proposed bargaining unit. The Board must notify the employer of the application without delay.

Marginal note:Agreements for term of two years or less

Marginal note:Continuation of terms and conditions

56 After being notified of an application for certification made in accordance with this Part or Division 1 of Part 2.1, the employer is not authorized, except under a collective agreement or with the consent of the Board, to alter the terms and conditions of employment that are applicable to the employees in the proposed bargaining unit and that may be included in a collective agreement until


Determination of Appropriate Bargaining Units


Marginal note:Determination of unit

Marginal note:Determination of questions of membership in bargaining units

58 On application by the employer or the employee organization affected, the Board must determine every question that arises as to whether any employee or class of employees is included in a bargaining unit determined by the Board to constitute a unit appropriate for collective bargaining, or is included in any other unit.


Managerial or Confidential Positions


Marginal note:Application

Marginal note:Copy to employee organization

60 The employer must provide the employee organization seeking to be certified with a copy of the application.

Marginal note:Objection

61 If the employee organization considers that a particular position in the employer’s application is not a position referred to in any of paragraphs 59(1)(a) to (h), it may file an objection in respect of that position with the Board.

Marginal note:Decision on objection

Marginal note:When no objection filed

63 If no objection is filed in respect of a particular position included in the application, the Board must make an order declaring the position to be a managerial or confidential position.


Certification


Marginal note:Conditions for certification

Marginal note:Representation vote


Where Certification Prohibited


Marginal note:Employer participation


Effect of Certification


Marginal note:Effect of certification

67 Certification of an employee organization as the bargaining agent for a bargaining unit has the following effects:

Marginal note:Termination of existing collective agreement or arbitral award

68 An employee organization that is certified as the bargaining agent for a bargaining unit may, despite anything contained in any collective agreement or arbitral award that is binding on any employees in the bargaining unit on the day of certification, terminate the agreement or award, in so far as it applies to the employees in the bargaining unit, on two months’ notice to the employer given within one month from the day of certification.

Marginal note:Rights of previous or new bargaining agent

69 Any question as to any right or duty of the previous bargaining agent or the new bargaining agent arising by reason of the application of paragraph 67(b) or (c) or section 68 must, on application by the employer or the previous or new bargaining agent, be determined by the Board.


Changes to Certification



Review of Bargaining Units


Marginal note:Review of structure of bargaining units


Managerial or Confidential Positions


Marginal note:Application

Marginal note:Copy to bargaining agent

72 The employer must provide the bargaining agent with a copy of the application.

Marginal note:Objection

73 If the bargaining agent considers that a particular position in the employer’s application is not a position referred to in any of paragraphs 59(1)(a) to (h), it may file an objection in respect of that position with the Board.

Marginal note:Decision on objection

Marginal note:When no objection filed

75 If no objection is filed in respect of a particular position included in the application, the Board must make an order declaring the position to be a managerial or confidential position.

Marginal note:Membership dues

Marginal note:Application for revocation of order

Marginal note:Decision


Successor Rights and Obligations


Marginal note:Mergers, amalgamations and transfers of jurisdiction

Marginal note:Definitions

80 The following definitions apply in this section and sections 81 to 93.

Marginal note:Continuation of collective agreement or arbitral award

81 Subject to sections 83 to 93, a collective agreement or arbitral award that applies to employees in any portion, or part of a portion, of the core public administration before its conversion continues in force after the conversion, and binds the new separate agency, until its term expires.

Marginal note:Parties may amend

82 Nothing in section 81 prohibits the new separate agency and the bargaining agent from amending any provision of a collective agreement, other than a provision relating to its term.

Marginal note:Application for certification

83 An employee organization may apply to the Board for certification as the bargaining agent for the employees bound by a collective agreement or arbitral award that is continued in force by section 81, but it may do so only during the period in which an application for certification is authorized to be made under section 55 in respect of those employees.

Marginal note:Power of Board

Marginal note:Application for leave to give notice to bargain collectively

Marginal note:Application for leave to give notice to bargain collectively

Marginal note:Notice to bargain given before conversion

87 A notice to bargain collectively that was given before a conversion does not bind the new separate agency and a new notice to bargain collectively may be given only in the circumstances described in paragraph 89(b).

Marginal note:Duty to observe terms and conditions

88 If a notice to bargain collectively was given before a conversion, then, unless the new separate agency and the bargaining agent agree otherwise, the terms and conditions of employment continued in force by section 107 are binding on the new separate agency, the bargaining agent for the bargaining unit and the employees in the bargaining unit from the date of the conversion until

Marginal note:Application and notice to bargain

89 If a notice to bargain collectively was given before a conversion,

Marginal note:Inquiry and votes

90 Before making an order under subsection 84(1) or paragraph 89(a), the Board may make any inquiry or direct that a representation vote be taken among the employees to be affected by the order. The provisions of subsection 65(2) apply in relation to the taking of a vote.

Marginal note:Consideration of employer’s classification

Marginal note:Determination of questions of membership in bargaining units

92 On application by the new separate agency or the employee organization affected, the Board must determine every question that arises as to whether any employee or class of employees is included in a bargaining unit determined by the Board under paragraph 84(1)(a) or 89(a) to constitute a unit appropriate for collective bargaining, or is included in any other unit.

Marginal note:Employer participation


Revocation of Certification


Marginal note:When employee organization no longer represents employees

Marginal note:Taking of representation vote

95 After the application is made, the Board may order that a representation vote be taken to determine whether a majority of the employees in the bargaining unit no longer wish to be represented by the employee organization that is the bargaining agent for that bargaining unit. The provisions of subsection 65(2) apply in relation to the taking of the vote.

Marginal note:Revocation of certification

96 If, after hearing the application, the Board is satisfied that a majority of the employees in the bargaining unit no longer wish to be represented by the employee organization, it must revoke the certification of the employee organization as the bargaining agent.

Marginal note:Certification obtained by fraud

97 The Board must revoke the certification of an employee organization if the Board is satisfied that it was obtained by fraud.

Marginal note:Employer participation or discrimination

98 The Board must revoke the certification of an employee organization as the bargaining agent for a bargaining unit if the Board, on application by the employer or any employee, determines that

Marginal note:Abandonment of certification

99 The Board must revoke the certification of an employee organization if the employee organization advises the Board that it wishes to give up or abandon its certification or if the Board, on application by the employer or any employee, determines that the employee organization has ceased to act as bargaining agent.

Marginal note:Council of employee organizations

Marginal note:Effect of revocation

Marginal note:Direction

102 If a collective agreement or arbitral award ceases to be in force as a result of the revocation of an employee organization’s certification as the bargaining agent for a bargaining unit, the Board must, on application by or on behalf of any employee in the bargaining unit, by order, direct the manner in which any right of the employee is to be recognized and given effect.


DIVISION 6Choice of Process for Dispute Resolution


Marginal note:Choice of process

Marginal note:Change of process


DIVISION 7Collective Bargaining and Collective Agreements



Negotiation of Collective Agreements



Notice to Bargain Collectively


Marginal note:Notice to bargain collectively


Effect of Notice


Marginal note:Duty to bargain in good faith

106 After the notice to bargain collectively is given, the bargaining agent and the employer must, without delay, and in any case within 20 days after the notice is given unless the parties otherwise agree,

Marginal note:Duty to observe terms and conditions

107 Unless the parties otherwise agree, and subject to section 132, after the notice to bargain collectively is given, each term and condition of employment applicable to the employees in the bargaining unit to which the notice relates that may be included in a collective agreement, and that is in force on the day the notice is given, is continued in force and must be observed by the employer, the bargaining agent for the bargaining unit and the employees in the bargaining unit until a collective agreement is entered into in respect of that term or condition or


Mediation


Marginal note:Appointment of mediator


Collective Bargaining for Two or More Units


Marginal note:Negotiation of single collective agreement


Two-tier Bargaining


Marginal note:Two-tier bargaining


Collective Agreements



Authority to Enter into Agreement


Marginal note:Authority of Treasury Board

111 The Treasury Board may, in the manner that may be provided for by any rules or procedures determined by it under section 5 of the Financial Administration Act, enter into a collective agreement with the bargaining agent for a bargaining unit, other than a bargaining unit composed of employees of a separate agency.

Marginal note:Authority of separate agency

112 A separate agency may, with the approval of the Governor in Council, enter into a collective agreement with the bargaining agent for a bargaining unit composed of employees of the separate agency.


Restriction on Content of Collective Agreement


Marginal note:Collective agreement not to require legislative implementation

113 A collective agreement that applies to a bargaining unit — other than a bargaining unit determined under section 238.14 — must not, directly or indirectly, alter or eliminate any existing term or condition of employment or establish any new term or condition of employment if


Duration and Effect


Marginal note:Agreement is binding

114 Subject to and for the purposes of this Part and Division 1 of Part 2.1, a collective agreement is binding on the employer, the bargaining agent and every employee in the bargaining unit on and after the day on which it has effect. To the extent that the collective agreement deals with matters referred to in section 12 of the Financial Administration Act, the collective agreement is also binding, on and after that day, on every deputy head responsible for any portion of the federal public administration that employs employees in the bargaining unit.

Marginal note:When agreement has effect

115 A collective agreement has effect in respect of a bargaining unit as of

Marginal note:Minimum duration

116 A collective agreement is deemed to have effect for one year, unless a longer period is specified in the collective agreement.

Marginal note:Duty to implement provisions of the collective agreement

117 Subject to the appropriation by or under the authority of Parliament of money that may be required by the employer, the parties must implement the provisions of a collective agreement


Amendments


Marginal note:Parties may amend

118 Nothing in this Part prohibits parties from amending any provision of a collective agreement, other than a provision relating to its term.


DIVISION 8Essential Services


Marginal note:Application of Division

119 This Division applies to the employer and the bargaining agent for a bargaining unit when the process for the resolution of a dispute applicable to the bargaining unit is conciliation.

Marginal note:Employer determines levels of service

120 The employer has the exclusive right to determine the level at which an essential service is to be provided to the public, or a segment of the public, at any time, including the extent to which and the frequency with which the service is to be provided. Nothing in this Division is to be construed as limiting that right.

Marginal note:Proportion of duties may vary during strike

Marginal note:Obligation to negotiate

Marginal note:Application to the Board

Marginal note:Coming into force of agreement

124 The essential services agreement comes into force on the day it is signed by the parties or, in the case of an essential services agreement that the employer and the bargaining agent are deemed to have entered into by an order made under paragraph 123(3)(b), the day the order was made.

Marginal note:Duration

125 An essential services agreement continues in force until the parties jointly determine that there are no employees in the bargaining unit who occupy positions that are necessary for the employer to provide essential services.

Marginal note:Notice to negotiate amendment

Marginal note:Application to Board

Marginal note:Coming into force of amendment

128 An amendment to an essential services agreement comes into force on the day the agreement containing the amendment is signed by the parties or, in the case of an amendment made by order of the Board under subsection 127(3), the day the order was made.

Marginal note:Replacement positions

Marginal note:Notification of employees

Marginal note:Emergency application

131 Despite any provision in this Division, if either the employer or the bargaining agent is of the opinion that a temporary amendment to an essential services agreement, or its suspension, is necessary because of an emergency but the parties are unable to agree to do so, either of them may, at any time, apply to the Board for an order temporarily amending, or suspending, the agreement.

Marginal note:Duty to observe terms and conditions

132 Unless the parties otherwise agree, every term and condition of employment applicable to employees in a bargaining unit in respect of which a notice to bargain collectively is given that may be included in a collective agreement and that is in force on the day the notice is given remains in force in respect of any employee who occupies a position that is identified in an essential services agreement and must be observed by the employer, the bargaining agent for the bargaining unit and the employee until a collective agreement is entered into.

Marginal note:Extension of time

133 The Board may, on the application of either party, extend any period referred to in this Division.

Marginal note:Filing of essential services agreement

134 Either party to an essential services agreement may file a copy of it with the Board. When filed, it has the same effect as an order of the Board.


DIVISION 9Arbitration



Application of Division


Marginal note:Application

135 This Division applies to the employer and the bargaining agent for a bargaining unit whenever


Request for Arbitration


Marginal note:Request for arbitration


Establishment of Arbitration Board


Marginal note:Establishment

Marginal note:Constitution

138 The arbitration board consists of either a single member or three members, appointed in accordance with section 139 or 140, as the case may be.

Marginal note:Board with single member

139 If the parties jointly recommend the appointment of a person to be an arbitration board consisting of a single member, the Chairperson must appoint the person to be the arbitration board.

Marginal note:Board with three members

Marginal note:Eligibility

141 No person may act as a member of an arbitration board in respect of a matter referred to arbitration if the person has, at any time during the six months before the person’s date of appointment, acted in respect of any matter concerning employer-employee relations as counsel or agent of the employer or of any employee organization that has an interest in the matter referred to arbitration.

Marginal note:Notification of establishment

Marginal note:Death, incapacity or resignation of single member


Referral to Arbitration


Marginal note:Referral to arbitration


Duty and Powers


Marginal note:Assistance to parties

145 As soon as possible after being established, the arbitration board must endeavour to assist the parties to the dispute in entering into or revising a collective agreement.

Marginal note:Procedure

Marginal note:Powers


Making of Arbitral Award


Marginal note:Factors to be considered

148 In the conduct of its proceedings and in making an arbitral award, the arbitration board must take into account the following factors, in addition to any other factors that it considers relevant:

Marginal note:Making of arbitral award

Marginal note:Award not to require legislative implementation

Marginal note:Decision of majority

Marginal note:Form of award

152 The form of the arbitral award must, wherever possible, permit the award to be

Marginal note:Copy sent to parties

153 On receipt of a copy of the arbitral award, the Chairperson must, without delay, send a copy to the parties and may cause the award to be published in any manner that the Chairperson considers appropriate.


Duration and Operation of Arbitral Award


Marginal note:Binding effect

154 Subject to and for the purposes of this Part and Division 1 of Part 2.1, as of the day on which it is made, the arbitral award binds the employer and the bargaining agent that are parties to it and the employees in the bargaining unit in respect of which the bargaining agent has been certified. To the extent that it deals with matters referred to in section 12 of the Financial Administration Act, the arbitral award is also binding, on and after that day, on every deputy head responsible for any portion of the federal public administration that employs employees in the bargaining unit.

Marginal note:When arbitral award has effect

Marginal note:Term of arbitral award


Implementation


Marginal note:Duty to implement provisions of the arbitral award

157 Subject to the appropriation by or under the authority of Parliament of any money that may be required by the employer, the parties must implement the provisions of the arbitral award within 90 days after the day on which the award becomes binding on them or within any longer period that the parties may agree to or that the Board, on application by either party, may set.


Matters Not Dealt With


Marginal note:Reference of matters not dealt with

158 Any party that considers that the arbitration board has failed to deal with a matter in dispute that was referred to arbitration may, within seven days after the day on which the arbitral award is made, refer the matter back to the arbitration board which must then deal with it.

158.1 [Repealed, 2018, c. 24, s. 12]


Amendment


Marginal note:Amendment

159 The Board may, on the joint application of both parties to whom an arbitral award applies, amend any provision of the arbitral award if it considers that the amendment is warranted having regard to circumstances that have arisen since the making of the arbitral award, or of which the arbitration board did not have notice when the award was made, or to any other circumstances that the Board considers relevant.


DIVISION 10Conciliation



Application of Division


Marginal note:Application

160 This Division applies to the employer and the bargaining agent for a bargaining unit whenever


Request for Conciliation


Marginal note:Request for conciliation


Establishment of Public Interest Commission


Marginal note:Recommendation to establish

Marginal note:Chairperson’s initiative

Marginal note:Constitution

Marginal note:List

Marginal note:Commission with single member

Marginal note:Commission with three members

Marginal note:Eligibility

168 No person may act as a member of the public interest commission in respect of a matter referred to conciliation if the person has, at any time during the six months before their date of appointment, acted in respect of any matter concerning employer-employee relations as counsel or agent of the employer or of any employee organization that has an interest in the matter referred to conciliation.

Marginal note:Notification of establishment

Marginal note:Death, incapacity or resignation of single member

Marginal note:Delivery of notice

171 After a public interest commission is established, the Chairperson must, without delay, deliver to it a copy of the notice given under subsection 161(1), if one was given.


Powers and Functions


Marginal note:Assistance to parties

172 As soon as possible after being established, the public interest commission must endeavour to assist the parties to the dispute in entering into or revising a collective agreement.

Marginal note:Procedure

Marginal note:Powers

Marginal note:Factors to be considered

175 In the conduct of its proceedings and in making a report to the Chairperson, the public interest commission must take into account the following factors, in addition to any other factors that it considers relevant:


Report


Marginal note:Report to Chairperson

Marginal note:Report not to require legislative implementation

Marginal note:Findings and recommendations of majority

Marginal note:Reconsideration of matters contained in report

179 The Chairperson may direct the public interest commission to reconsider and clarify or amplify its report or any part of the report.

Marginal note:Copy of report to be sent to parties

180 The Chairperson must, as soon as possible after receiving the report or, if the Chairperson makes a direction under section 179, as soon as possible after receiving the reconsidered report, send a copy to the parties and cause the report, or the reconsidered report, as the case may be, to be published in any manner that he or she considers appropriate.

Marginal note:Agreement to be bound

181 If, before the public interest commission submits its report to the Chairperson, the parties agree in writing that one or more recommendations to be made by the public interest commission in the report are to be binding on them, each such recommendation, once made, is binding on them and must be given effect.


Alternate Dispute Resolution Process


Marginal note:Alternate dispute resolution process


Vote on Employer’s Offer


Marginal note:Minister may order vote to be held


DIVISION 11Strike Votes


Marginal note:Secret ballot vote


DIVISION 12Unfair Labour Practices


Marginal note:Meaning of unfair labour practice

185 In this Division, unfair labour practice means anything that is prohibited by subsection 186(1) or (2), section 187 or 188 or subsection 189(1).

Marginal note:Unfair labour practices — employer

Marginal note:Unfair representation by bargaining agent

187 No employee organization that is certified as the bargaining agent for a bargaining unit, and none of its officers and representatives, shall act in a manner that is arbitrary or discriminatory or that is in bad faith in the representation of any employee in the bargaining unit.

Marginal note:Unfair labour practices — employee organizations

188 No employee organization and no officer or representative of an employee organization or other person acting on behalf of an employee organization shall

Marginal note:Unfair labour practices — persons


DIVISION 13Complaints


Marginal note:Complaints

Marginal note:Duty and power of the Board

Marginal note:Orders


DIVISION 14Prohibitions and Enforcement



Acts of Officers and Representatives of Employee Organizations


Marginal note:Acts deemed to be those of employee organization

193 For the purposes of this Part, an act or thing done or omitted by an officer or representative of an employee organization within the scope of that person’s authority to act on the employee organization’s behalf is deemed to be an act or thing done or omitted by the employee organization.


Prohibitions Relating to Strikes


Marginal note:Declaration or authorization of strike prohibited

Marginal note:Non-employees

195 No person employed in the public service shall participate in a strike if the person is not an employee.

Marginal note:Participation prohibited

196 No employee shall participate in a strike if the employee

Marginal note:Right to strike limited during period between Parliaments


Declarations and Orders Relating to Strikes


Marginal note:Application for declaration that conduct is unlawful


Prohibition Relating to Essential Services


Marginal note:Obstruction

199 No person shall impede or prevent or attempt to impede or prevent an employee from entering or leaving the employee’s place of work if the employee occupies a position that is necessary under an essential services agreement for the employer to provide essential services.


Prohibition Relating to Counselling


Marginal note:Counselling in respect of peace officer duties

199.1 No employee organization and no officer or representative of an employee organization shall counsel any RCMP member or reservist not to carry out their duties as a peace officer.


Offences and Punishment


Marginal note:Persons

200 Every person who contravenes subsection 186(1) or (2), section 188, subsection 189(1) or section 195 or 199 is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine of not more than $1,000.

Marginal note:Employees

201 Every employee who contravenes section 196 or subsection 197(4) is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine of not more than $1,000.

Marginal note:Employee organizations

Marginal note:Officers and representatives of employee organizations

203 Every officer or representative of an employee organization who contravenes subsection 194(1) or section 199.1 is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine of not more than $10,000.

Marginal note:Employer

204 If the employer contravenes subsection 186(1) or (2), the employer is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine of not more than $10,000.

Marginal note:Consent to prosecution

205 A prosecution for an offence under this Division may be instituted only with the consent of the Board.


PART 2Grievances



Interpretation


Marginal note:Definitions


Conflict Management


Marginal note:Informal conflict management system

207 Subject to any policies established by the employer or any directives issued by it, every deputy head in the core public administration must, in consultation with bargaining agents representing employees in the portion of the core public administration for which he or she is deputy head, establish an informal conflict management system and inform the employees in that portion of its availability.


Individual Grievances



Presentation


Marginal note:Right of employee


Reference to Adjudication


Marginal note:Reference to adjudication

Marginal note:Reference to adjudication

209.1 In addition to his or her rights under section 209, an employee, other than an employee who occupies a managerial or confidential position or who is not otherwise represented by a bargaining agent, may refer to adjudication an individual grievance that has been presented up to and including the final level in the grievance process and that has not been dealt with to the employee’s satisfaction if the employee has suffered physical or psychological harm, property damage or economic loss as the result of — or has otherwise been adversely affected by — the contravention of a provision of regulations made under subsection 117(1) of the Accessible Canada Act, and the grievance is related to that contravention.

Marginal note:Notice to Canadian Human Rights Commission

Marginal note:Notice to Accessibility Commissioner

Marginal note:Exception

211 Nothing in section 209 or 209.1 is to be construed or applied as permitting the referral to adjudication of an individual grievance with respect to


Representation


Marginal note:Right to be represented by employee organization

212 An employee who is not included in a bargaining unit for which an employee organization has been certified as bargaining agent may seek the assistance of, and, if the employee chooses, may be represented by, any employee organization in the presentation or reference to adjudication of an individual grievance.

Marginal note:Right to be represented by employee organization

213 No employee who is included in a bargaining unit for which an employee organization has been certified as bargaining agent may be represented by any other employee organization in the presentation or reference to adjudication of an individual grievance.


Binding Effect


Marginal note:Decision final and binding

214 If an individual grievance has been presented up to and including the final level in the grievance process and it is not one that under section 209, 209.1 or 238.25 may be referred to adjudication, the decision on the grievance taken at the final level in the grievance process is final and binding for all purposes of this Act and no further action under this Act may be taken on it.


Group Grievances



Presentation


Marginal note:Right of bargaining agent


Reference to Adjudication


Marginal note:Reference to adjudication

216 The bargaining agent may refer to adjudication any group grievance that has been presented up to and including the final level in the grievance process and that has not been dealt with to its satisfaction.

Marginal note:Notice to Canadian Human Rights Commission


Withdrawal from Group Grievance


Marginal note:Notice to Accessibility Commissioner

Marginal note:Right of employee to withdraw

218 An employee in respect of whom a group grievance has been presented may, at any time before a final decision is made in respect of the grievance, notify the bargaining agent that the employee no longer wishes to be involved in the group grievance.

Marginal note:Effect of notice

219 After receiving the notice, the bargaining agent may not pursue the grievance in respect of the employee.


Policy Grievances



Presentation


Marginal note:Right of employer and bargaining agent


Reference to Adjudication


Marginal note:Reference to adjudication

221 A party that presents a policy grievance may refer it to adjudication.

Marginal note:Notice to Canadian Human Rights Commission


Adjudication



Notice to Board


Marginal note:Notice to Accessibility Commissioner

Marginal note:Notice


Board of Adjudication


Marginal note:Constitution


Jurisdiction


Marginal note:Compliance with procedures

225 No grievance may be referred to adjudication until the grievance has been presented at all required levels in accordance with the applicable grievance process.


Powers


Marginal note:Powers of adjudicator

227 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 376]


Decision


Marginal note:Hearing of grievance

Marginal note:Decision requiring amendment

229 An adjudicator’s or the Board’s decision may not have the effect of requiring the amendment of a collective agreement or an arbitral award.

Marginal note:Determination of reasonableness of opinion

230 In the case of an employee in the core public administration or an employee of a separate agency designated under subsection 209(3), in making a decision in respect of an employee’s individual grievance relating to a termination of employment or demotion for unsatisfactory performance, an adjudicator or the Board, as the case may be, must determine the termination or demotion to have been for cause if the opinion of the deputy head that the employee’s performance was unsatisfactory is determined by the adjudicator or the Board to have been reasonable.

Marginal note:Determination of consent requirement

231 An adjudicator or the Board, when seized of a grievance referred to in subparagraph 209(1)(c)(ii), may determine any question relating to whether

Marginal note:Decision in respect of certain policy grievances

232 If a policy grievance relates to a matter that was or could have been the subject of an individual grievance or a group grievance, an adjudicator’s or the Board’s decision in respect of the policy grievance is limited to one or more of the following:

Marginal note:No review by court

233 Subsections 34(1) and (3) of the Federal Public Sector Labour Relations and Employment Board Act apply, with any necessary modifications, to an adjudicator’s orders and decisions.

Marginal note:Filing of order in Federal Court


Expenses of Adjudication


Marginal note:Aggrieved employee not represented by agent


No Right of Action


Marginal note:Disputes relating to employment


Regulations


Marginal note:Regulations

Marginal note:Regulations

238 The Board may make regulations respecting


PART 2.1Provisions Unique to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police



Interpretation


Marginal note:Definition of RCMP Commissioner

Marginal note:Inconsistency with Part 1 or 2

Marginal note:Employer’s right preserved

238.03 Nothing in this Act is to be construed as affecting the right or authority of the Treasury Board to determine categories of members as defined in subsection 2(1) of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Act.

Marginal note:Duties preserved

238.04 Nothing in this Act is to be construed as affecting any duties of members as defined in subsection 2(1) of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Act who are peace officers, or any duties of reservists who are peace officers, including duties imposed under that Act.


Unique Role as Police Organization


Marginal note:Board’s additional duty

238.05 In administering this Act and in exercising the powers and performing the duties and functions that are conferred or imposed on it by this Act, or as are incidental to the attainment of the objects of this Act, including the making of orders requiring compliance with this Act, with regulations made under it or with decisions made in respect of a matter coming before the Board, the Board must, in matters concerning RCMP members and reservists, take into account the unique role of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police as a police organization in protecting public safety and national security and its need to deploy its members and reservists as it sees fit.


DIVISION 1Labour Relations



Adjournment of Proceedings


Marginal note:Prejudice to ongoing investigations or proceedings


Law Enforcement, Public Safety and National Security


Marginal note:Non-disclosure

Marginal note:Order regarding disclosure

Marginal note:Protection

Marginal note:Use of information

238.1 Information about which an objection is made under subsection 238.07(1) that is disclosed by the RCMP Commissioner to the Board or to a party in connection with the matter or proceeding that gave rise to the objection may be used only in connection with that matter or proceeding.

Marginal note:Memorandum of understanding

238.11 The Chairperson and the RCMP Commissioner may enter into a memorandum of understanding setting out principles and procedures respecting the disclosure of information referred to in subsection 238.07(1) and the protection of that information if it is disclosed.

Marginal note:Disclosure of information — other legal proceedings


Certification of Bargaining Agents


Marginal note:Right to apply

Marginal note:Determination of unit

238.14 If an application for certification is made under subsection 238.13(1), the Board must determine that the group that consists exclusively of all the employees who are RCMP members and all the employees who are reservists constitutes the single, national bargaining unit that is appropriate for collective bargaining.

Marginal note:Limitation

238.15 An employee organization that is certified as the bargaining agent for the bargaining unit determined under section 238.14 is not entitled to seek to be certified as bargaining agent for any other group of employees.

Marginal note:Limitation

238.16 Despite section 58, the Board does not have jurisdiction to determine that an employee who is not an RCMP member or a reservist is included in the bargaining unit determined under section 238.14.


Revocation of Certification


Marginal note:Mandate or affiliation


Process for Dispute Resolution


Marginal note:Arbitration

238.18 Sections 103 and 104 do not apply to disputes between the employer and the bargaining agent for the bargaining unit determined under section 238.14. The process for the resolution of those disputes is arbitration.


Restriction on Content of Collective Agreement


Marginal note:Restriction

238.19 A collective agreement that applies to the bargaining unit determined under section 238.14 must not, directly or indirectly, alter or eliminate any existing term or condition of employment or establish any new term or condition of employment if


Essential Services, Conciliation and Strike Votes


Marginal note:Non-application of Divisions 8, 10 and 11 of Part 1

238.2 Divisions 8, 10 and 11 of Part 1 do not apply in respect of the bargaining unit determined under section 238.14.


Arbitration


Marginal note:Arbitral award — additional factor

238.21 In addition to the factors set out in section 148, the arbitration board may, if relevant to making a determination under that section in regards to a collective agreement that applies to the bargaining unit determined under section 238.14, take into account the impact of the determination on the operational effectiveness of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.

Marginal note:Arbitral award — limitations


Regulations


Marginal note:Regulations

238.23 The Governor in Council may make regulations


DIVISION 2Grievances



Individual Grievances


Marginal note:Limited right to grieve

238.24 Subject to subsections 208(2) to (7), an employee who is an RCMP member is entitled to present an individual grievance only if they feel aggrieved by the interpretation or application, in respect of the employee, of a provision of a collective agreement or arbitral award.

Marginal note:Limited right to refer to adjudication


Adjournment of Proceedings


Marginal note:Prejudice to ongoing investigations or proceedings


Law Enforcement, Public Safety and National Security


Marginal note:Non-disclosure

Marginal note:Order regarding disclosure

Marginal note:Protection

Marginal note:Use of ...