
First Aid to the General Public - Allowance for Employees



First Aid to the General Public - Allowance for Employees



General



Collective Agreement


This directive is deemed to be part of collective agreements between the parties to the National Joint Council and employees are to be afforded ready access to this directive.


Effective Date


This directive is effective March 1, 2022.


Purpose


As a result of a recommendation made by the National Joint Council of the Federal Public Service of Canada, the Treasury Board considered and approved (TB 766604) the payment of a first aid allowance for certain employees required to be available to render first-aid to the general public.

A direct allowance will be paid to eligible employees designated by departmental management to be available on a regular basis to provide, in addition to their regular duties, first aid to the general public.

The intent of this directive is to provide an allowance to certain employees required to provide, in addition to their regular duties, first aid to the general public. The intent of this directive is not to provide an allowance to employees voluntarily rendering first aid to fellow employees.


Grievance Procedure


In cases of alleged misinterpretation or misapplication arising out of this directive, the grievance procedure, for all represented employees within the meaning of the Federal Public Sector Labour Relations Act, will be in accordance with section 15.0 of the National Joint Council By-Laws. For unrepresented employees the departmental grievance procedure applies.


Definitions


General Public (grand public): individuals forming the bulk or major part of the public excluding anyone with whom the employee has a working relationship in a formal or informal capacity because of the department’s mandate, mission or legislated requirements. For greater certainty, “general public” does not include co-workers, colleagues, managers, subordinates, or individuals detained in any enforcement capacity.

The First Aid Allowance (indemnité de premiers soins): is a flat amount of $300 per annum, determined monthly and paid on a bi-weekly basis.


1 Administration



1.1 Responsibilities


1.1.1 The responsibility of the Treasury Board Secretariat is to evaluate and audit the administration of this directive in departments and agencies.

1.1.2 The responsibilities of the departments are as follows:

1.1.3 Departments shall maintain records pertaining to the first aid allowance. The information recorded shall include the position number, the employment status, location of employees receiving the allowance, and the total cost per annum.


1.2 Eligible employees


1.2.1 To qualify for the first aid allowance, employees must meet the following four requirements:


1.3 Excluded personnel


1.3.1 The first aid allowance shall not be paid to:


1.4 Pay considerations


1.4.1 An eligible employee shall be entitled to receive the monthly amount of the first aid allowance for any month in which the employee has earned a minimum of ten (10) days' pay in a position to which the first aid allowance applies.

1.4.2 An employee is entitled to receive the first aid allowance during any period of paid leave.

1.4.3 The first aid allowance shall be considered as part of an employee's salary only for the purposes of the following:

1.4.4 The first aid allowance will not be considered as part of an employee's salary or used to compute an employee's salary entitlements in respect of the following:


1.5 Liability


1.5.1 It is the Crown's practice to pay both damages and costs to the injured party without seeking any contribution from the employee personally, unless the employee was acting outside the scope of his or her duties or unless the employee's behaviour amounted to gross or wilful negligence.


1.6 Enquiries


1.6.1 All enquiries regarding this policy should be routed through departmental headquarters. For interpretation, departmental headquarters should contact:

Union Engagement and National Joint Council Support Office of the Chief Human Resources Officer Treasury Board of Canada SecretariatOHS-TBS@tbs-sct.gc.ca.