Skip to main content
Skip to "About government"
Switch to basic HTML version
Language selection
Français
/ Gouvernement du Canada
Search
Search Canada.ca
Search
Menu
MAIN
MENU
You are here:
Canada.ca Public Service Commission of Canada Appointment Framework
Guides and Tools - Appointment Framework
Important notice

Information for human resource specialists: Alternative methods for second language evaluation

For specific information and assistance, contact your designated Staffing Support Advisor or visit our GCpedia page (accessible only on the Government of Canada network).

Find resources about the amendments to the Public Service Employment Act on our PSC Extranet page (accessible only on the Government of Canada network).

Find resources for implementing the amendments to the Public Service Employment Regulations on our PSC Extranet page (accessible only on the Government of Canada network). New!

Guides

These guides are designed to assist human resources advisors and other stakeholders involved in implementing the Public Service Employment Act (PSEA). These guides are intended to be works in progress. They will be updated periodically to remain as accurate as possible.

Interim Guide on Alternative Recruitment Platforms New!
Staffing and Modern Treaties New!
Spotlight on Preference for Appointment New!
Artificial intelligence in the hiring process New!
Selection of employees for retention or lay-off: Guide for managers and human resources specialists New!
Conditional job offers Updated!
Staffing: Hiring Veterans Updated!
Spotlight on diverse assessment boards
Affirmation of Indigenous Identity Form
Spotlight on area of selection
Employment Systems Review
Advertising an appointment process
PSC Staffing Interpretation Centre
Flexibility in Assessment
Staffing options to support employment equity, and diversity and inclusion, under the Public Service Employment Act - Questions and answers
Assessment of official languages in the appointment process
Hiring from pools – Advertised or non-advertised appointment
Performance Reviews in the Appointment Process
Cyclical staffing assessment
Staffing Oversight Reference Tool (SORT)
Federal Public Service Inclusive Appointment Lens
Employment Equity – Leveraging Staffing Options for Hiring Managers
Student Bridging
Reference List - Organizations' Relationship with PSC and the PSEA
Self-Declaration Information
Public Service Official Languages Exclusion Approval Order
Guide to the Sub-delegation of Appointment and Appointment-related Authorities - Archived
Under review
Selection for Retention or Lay-Off
Guide on the selection of employees for retention or lay-off Important notice
Guide on the selection of executives for retention or lay-off Important notice
Selection of employees for retention or lay-off: Assessment module  Important notice
Testing in the Public Service of Canada
Guide for Assessing Persons with Disabilities
Guidelines for Fair Assessment in a Diverse Workplace: Removing Barriers to Members of Visible Minorities and Aboriginal Peoples
Structured Interviewing: How to design and conduct structured interviews for an appointment process
Structured Reference Checking: A User's Guide to Best Practices
Best Practices for Unsupervised Testing
Other Links
PSC Information Kit
Information for human resources specialists
Building a representative public service
Page details
 2026-03-31
About this site
Contact us
General enquiries
GC Jobs
Second language evaluation
Government of Canada
All contacts
Departments and agencies
About government
Themes and topics
Jobs
Immigration and citizenship
Travel and tourism
Business
Benefits
Health
Taxes
Environment and natural resources
National security and defence
Culture, history and sport
Policing, justice and emergencies
Transport and infrastructure
Canada and the world
Money and finances
Science and innovation
Indigenous Peoples
Veterans and military
Youth
Manage life events
Government of Canada Corporate
Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy