MAIN CONT DIV START

Assented to 2003-11-07

An Act respecting employment in the public service

[Enacted by sections 12 and 13 of chapter 22 of the Statutes of Canada, 2003, in force December 31, 2005, see SI/2005-122.]


Preamble


Recognizing that

the public service has contributed to the building of Canada, and will continue to do so in the future while delivering services of highest quality to the public;

Canada will continue to benefit from a public service that is based on merit and non-partisanship and in which these values are independently safeguarded;

Canada will also continue to gain from a public service that strives for excellence, that is representative of Canada’s diversity and that is able to serve the public with integrity and in their official language of choice;

the public service, whose members are drawn from across the country, reflects a myriad of backgrounds, skills and professions that are a unique resource for Canada;

authority to make appointments to and within the public service has been vested in the Public Service Commission, which can delegate this authority to deputy heads;

those to whom this appointment authority is delegated must exercise it within a framework that ensures that they are accountable for its proper use to the Commission, which in turn is accountable to Parliament;

delegation of staffing authority should be to as low a level as possible within the public service, and should afford public service managers the flexibility necessary to staff, to manage and to lead their personnel to achieve results for Canadians; and

the Government of Canada is committed to an inclusive public service that reflects the diversity of Canada’s population, that embodies linguistic duality and that is characterized by fair, transparent employment practices, respect for employees, effective dialogue, and recourse aimed at resolving appointment issues;

NOW, THEREFORE, Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and House of Commons of Canada, enacts as follows:


Short Title


Marginal note:Short title

1 This Act may be cited as the Public Service Employment Act.


Interpretation


Marginal note:Definitions

Marginal note:Descriptive cross-references

3 If, in any provision of this Act, a reference to another provision of this Act is followed by words in parentheses that are descriptive of the subject-matter of the provision referred to, the words in parentheses form no part of the provision in which they occur and are deemed to have been inserted for convenience of reference only.


PART 1Public Service Commission, Deputy Heads and Employer



Commission


Marginal note:Commission continued

Marginal note:Salaries

Marginal note:President

Marginal note:Quorum

Marginal note:Head office

8 The head office of the Commission shall be in the National Capital Region described in the schedule to the National Capital Act.

Marginal note:Human resources

9 The Commission may appoint the persons necessary for the proper conduct of its work in the manner authorized by this Act.

Marginal note:Experts and advisers


Mandate and Functions of Commission


Marginal note:Mandate

11 The mandate of the Commission is

Marginal note:Functions assigned by Governor in Council

12 The Commission shall perform any functions in relation to the public service that are assigned to it by the Governor in Council.

Marginal note:Delegation to Commissioners and employees

13 Any power or function of the Commission under this Act, other than under section 20 or 22, may be exercised or performed by any Commissioner or employee of the Commission authorized by the Commission to do so and, if so exercised or performed, is deemed to have been exercised or performed by the Commission.

Marginal note:Consultation by Commission

14 The Commission shall, on request or if it considers consultation necessary or desirable, consult with the employer or any employee organization certified as a bargaining agent under the Federal Public Sector Labour Relations Act with respect to policies respecting the manner of making and revoking appointments or with respect to the principles governing lay-offs or priorities for appointment.


Delegation by Commission to Deputy Heads


Marginal note:Exercise of powers and functions by deputy heads

Marginal note:Compliance with appointment policies

16 In exercising or performing any of the Commission’s powers and functions pursuant to section 15, a deputy head is subject to any policies established by the Commission under subsection 29(3).


Commission Audits


Marginal note:Audits by Commission

Marginal note:Powers of Commission

18 In conducting an audit, the Commission has all the powers of a commissioner under Part I of the Inquiries Act.

Marginal note:Persons acting for Commission


Exclusions from this Act


Marginal note:Exclusion of positions and persons

Marginal note:Regulations of Governor in Council

21 The Governor in Council may, on the recommendation of the Commission, make regulations prescribing how any position or person, or class of positions or persons, excluded under section 20 from the application of this Act or any of its provisions is to be dealt with.


Regulations of Commission


Marginal note:General regulatory power


Reports — Commission


Marginal note:Preparation of report


Deputy Heads


Marginal note:Delegation by deputy head

Marginal note:Acting deputy head

25 In the absence of the deputy head of a department or other organization, the powers and functions of the deputy head may be exercised by the person designated by the deputy head to act in his or her absence or, if no person has been so designated or there is no deputy head,


Regulations and Policies of Employer


Marginal note:Regulations of Treasury Board

Marginal note:Consultation by employer

27 An employer shall, on request or if it considers consultation necessary or desirable,

28 [Repealed, 2012, c. 19, s. 222]


PART 2Appointments



Authority to Appoint


Marginal note:Commission’s exclusive authority


Basis of Appointment


Marginal note:Appointment on basis of merit

Marginal note:Qualification standards

Marginal note:Professional development programs

32 In respect of appointments made within the framework of any professional development or apprenticeship program that is offered across departments and other organizations, the qualifications, requirements and needs referred to in subsection 30(2) are established or identified by the Treasury Board with respect to organizations for which the Treasury Board is the employer.

Marginal note:Appointment processes

33 In making an appointment, the Commission may use an advertised or non-advertised appointment process.

Marginal note:Area of selection

Marginal note:Mobility  — separate agencies

Marginal note:Mobility — member of Canadian Forces

Marginal note:Mobility — former member of Canadian Forces

Marginal note:Mobility — ministers’ staffs

35.2 A person who has been employed for at least three years in the office of a minister or of a person holding the recognized position of Leader of the Opposition in the Senate or Leader of the Opposition in the House of Commons, or in any of those offices successively,

Marginal note:Parliamentary employees

35.3 A person employed in the Senate, House of Commons, Library of Parliament, office of the Senate Ethics Officer, office of the Conflict of Interest and Ethics Commissioner, Parliamentary Protective Service or office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer

Marginal note:Assessment methods

Marginal note:Language of examination

Marginal note:Exceptions to merit

38 Paragraph 30(2)(b) does not apply in relation to any appointment made under subsection 15(6) (re-appointment on revocation by deputy head), section 39.1 (priority — members of the Canadian Forces) or 40 (priorities — surplus employees), subsection 41(1) or (4) (other priorities) or section 73 (re-appointment on revocation by Commission) or 86 (re-appointment following Board order), or under any regulations made under paragraph 22(2)(a).


Preferences, Priorities and Entitlements


Marginal note:Preference to veterans and Canadian citizens

Marginal note:Priority — member of Canadian Forces

Marginal note:Priority — surplus employees

40 Notwithstanding section 41, after a deputy head informs an employee that the employee will be laid off pursuant to subsection 64(1) and before the lay-off becomes effective, the Commission may appoint the employee in priority to all other persons to another position under the deputy head’s jurisdiction if the Commission is satisfied that the employee meets the essential qualifications referred to in paragraph 30(2)(a) and that it is in the best interests of the public service to make the appointment.

Marginal note:Priority — persons on leave

Marginal note:Resumption of employment

Marginal note:Failure to appoint person on leave

42 A person who is entitled under subsection 41(1) to be appointed to a position and who is not so appointed in the applicable period provided for in that subsection ceases to be an employee at the end of that period.

Marginal note:Non-application of priority provisions

43 Despite sections 39.1, 40 and 41 and any regulations made under paragraph 22(2)(a), if the Commission considers that the appointment of a person who has a right to be appointed in priority to other persons under any of those provisions will result in another person having a priority right, the Commission may decide not to apply that provision in that case.

Marginal note:Participation in advertised process — lay-offs

44 A person who is laid off under subsection 64(1) is entitled, during any period that the Commission determines for any case or class of cases, to participate in any advertised appointment process for which the person would have been eligible had the person not been laid off.

Marginal note:Non-application to term employees

45 Section 40, subsection 41(4) and section 44 do not apply to a person whose employment was for a specified term at the time they were informed that they would be laid off.

Marginal note:Deemed lay-off

46 For the purposes of subsection 41(4) and section 44, a person who, while employed in the public service, does not accept an offer of employment made in the circumstances referred to in paragraph 12(1)(f) of the Financial Administration Act that is a reasonable job offer within the meaning of an agreement respecting work force adjustment or who accepts an offer of employment, made in such circumstances, that is not a reasonable job offer within the meaning of such an agreement, is deemed to be laid off.


Informal Discussion and Appointment


Marginal note:Informal discussion with employee

47 Where a person is informed by the Commission, at any stage of an internal appointment process, that the person has been eliminated from consideration for appointment, the Commission may, at that person’s request, informally discuss its decision with that person.

Marginal note:Persons being considered for appointment

Marginal note:Finality of appointments

49 The Commission’s decision to appoint a person or to propose a person for appointment is final and is not subject to appeal or review except in accordance with this Act.


Casual Employment


Marginal note:Appointment

Marginal note:Exception — Office of the Chief Electoral Officer

50.1 Despite subsection 50(2), the maximum period of employment of casual workers appointed in the Office of the Chief Electoral Officer — including the portions of the federal public administration in that Office in which the employees referred to in section 509.3 of the Canada Elections Act occupy their positions — for the purposes of an election held under that Act or a referendum held under the Referendum Act is 165 working days in one calendar year.

Marginal note:Exception


PART 3Deployments


Marginal note:Authority of deputy heads to deploy

Marginal note:Previous position

52 On deployment, a person ceases to be the incumbent of the position to which he or she had previously been appointed or deployed.

Marginal note:Deployment not an appointment


PART 4Employment


Marginal note:Oath or affirmation

54 A person appointed or deployed from outside that part of the public service to which the Commission has exclusive authority to make appointments shall take and subscribe an oath or solemn affirmation in the following form:

I, , swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will faithfully and honestly fulfil the duties that devolve on me by reason of my employment in the public service of Canada and that I will not, without due authority, disclose or make known any matter that comes to my knowledge by reason of such employment. (Add, in the case where an oath is taken, “So help me God” (or name of deity).)

Marginal note:Effective date of appointment or deployment

55 The appointment or deployment of a person from outside that part of the public service to which the Commission has exclusive authority to make appointments takes effect on the later of the date that is agreed to in writing by the deputy head and that person and the date on which the person takes and subscribes the oath or solemn affirmation set out in section 54.

Marginal note:Effective date of appointment

Marginal note:Indeterminate employment

57 Subject to this Act, any other Act and regulations made under this or any other Act, the period of an employee’s employment is indeterminate unless the deputy head has specified a term of employment.

Marginal note:Term appointment or deployment

Marginal note:Conversion to indeterminate

Marginal note:Rate of pay on appointment

60 The rate of pay on appointment to a position shall be determined by the employer within the scale of rates of pay for that position or for positions of the same occupational nature and level as that position.

Marginal note:Probationary period

Marginal note:Termination of employment

Marginal note:Resignation

63 An employee may resign from the public service by giving the deputy head notice in writing of his or her intention to resign, and the employee ceases to be an employee on the date specified by the deputy head in writing on accepting the resignation, regardless of the date of the acceptance.

Marginal note:Laying off of employees

Marginal note:Complaint to Board re lay-off


PART 5Investigations and Complaints Relating to Appointments



Investigation of Appointments by Commission


Marginal note:External appointments

66 The Commission may investigate any external appointment process and, if it is satisfied that the appointment was not made or proposed to be made on the basis of merit, or that there was an error, an omission or improper conduct that affected the selection of the person appointed or proposed for appointment, the Commission may

Marginal note:Internal appointments — no delegation

Marginal note:Political influence

68 If it has reason to believe that an appointment or proposed appointment was not free from political influence, the Commission may investigate the appointment process and, if it is satisfied that the appointment or proposed appointment was not free from political influence, the Commission may

Marginal note:Fraud

69 If it has reason to believe that fraud may have occurred in an appointment process, the Commission may investigate the appointment process and, if it is satisfied that fraud has occurred, the Commission may

Marginal note:Powers of Commission

Marginal note:Persons acting for Commission

Marginal note:Right to make submissions

72 Where an investigation is conducted under this Part in relation to a person’s appointment or proposed appointment, that person and the deputy head in relation to the appointment — or their representatives — are entitled to make submissions to the Commission, Commissioner or other person, whichever is conducting the investigation.

Marginal note:Re-appointment following revocation

73 Where the appointment of a person is revoked under any of sections 66 to 69, the Commission may appoint that person to another position if the Commission is satisfied that the person meets the essential qualifications referred to in paragraph 30(2)(a).


Complaints to Board — Revocation of Appointment


Marginal note:Complaint

74 A person whose appointment is revoked by the Commission under subsection 67(1) or by the deputy head under subsection 15(3) or 67(2) may, in the manner and within the period provided by the Board’s regulations, make a complaint to the Board that the revocation was unreasonable.

Marginal note:Right to be heard

75 Where a complaint is made under section 74, the complainant, the deputy head and the Commission — or their representatives — are entitled to be heard by the Board.

Marginal note:Revocation set aside

76 Where the Board finds a complaint under section 74 to be substantiated, it may order the Commission or the deputy head, as the case may be, to set aside the revocation.


Complaints to Board — Internal Appointments


Marginal note:Grounds of complaint

Marginal note:Notice to Canadian Human Rights Commission

78 Where a complaint raises an issue involving the interpretation or application of the Canadian Human Rights Act, the complainant shall, in accordance with the regulations of the Board, notify the Canadian Human Rights Commission of the issue.

Marginal note:Notice to Accessibility Commissioner

78.1 If a complaint raises an issue involving the contravention of a provision of regulations made under subsection 117(1) of the Accessible Canada Act, the complainant shall, in accordance with the regulations of the Board, notify the Accessibility Commissioner, as defined in section 2 of that Act.

Marginal note:Right to be heard

Marginal note:Application of Canadian Human Rights Act

80 In considering whether a complaint under section 77 is substantiated, the Board may interpret and apply the Canadian Human Rights Act, other than its provisions relating to the right to equal pay for work of equal value.

Marginal note:Application of Accessible Canada Act

80.1 In considering whether a complaint under section 77 is substantiated, the Board may interpret and apply the Accessible Canada Act.

Marginal note:Corrective action when complaint upheld

Marginal note:Restrictions

82 The Board may not order the Commission to make an appointment or to conduct a new appointment process.

Marginal note:Failure of corrective action

83 Where the Commission has made or proposed an appointment as a result of the implementation of corrective action ordered under section 81, a complaint may be made to the Board, in the manner and within the period provided by its regulations, by

on the grounds that the person was not appointed or proposed for appointment by reason of an abuse of authority by the Commission or deputy head in the implementation of the corrective action.

Marginal note:Powers of Board

84 Where the Board finds a complaint under section 83 to be substantiated, it may

Marginal note:Right to be heard

85 In the consideration of a complaint made under section 83, the persons entitled to be heard by the Board are the persons entitled to make a complaint under that section in respect of the corrective action, the person appointed or proposed for appointment as a result of the corrective action, the deputy head and the Commission, or their representatives.

Marginal note:Appointment to other position

86 Where the appointment of a person is revoked pursuant to subsection 81(1), the Commission may appoint that person to another position if the Commission is satisfied that the person meets the essential qualifications referred to in paragraph 30(2)(a).

Marginal note:No right to complain

87 No complaint may be made under section 77 in respect of an appointment made under subsection 15(6) (re-appointment on revocation by deputy head), section 39.1 (priority — members of the Canadian Forces) or 40 (priorities — surplus employees), subsection 41(1) or (4) (other priorities) or section 73 (re-appointment on revocation by Commission) or 86 (re-appointment following Board order) or under any regulations made under paragraph 22(2)(a).


PART 6Federal Public Sector Labour Relations and Employment Board



Powers, Duties and Functions


Marginal note:Complaints

88 The Board is to consider and dispose of complaints made under subsection 65(1) and sections 74, 77 and 83.

Marginal note:Powers

89 Subject to any limitations that the Governor in Council may establish in the interests of defence or security, the Board has, in relation to a complaint, the power to enter any premises of an employer where work is being or has been done by employees, inspect and view any work, material, machinery, appliances or articles in the premises and require any person in the premises to answer all questions relating to the complaint.

90 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 405]

91 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 405]

92 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 405]

93 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 405]

94 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 405]

95 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 405]

96 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 405]


Mediation Services


Marginal note:Mediation services

98 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 407]

99 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 407]

100 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 407]

101 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 407]

102 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 407]


Complaint Procedure


Marginal note:Filing of order in Federal Court

Marginal note:Copy of decision provided

103.1 The Board shall render a decision on a complaint made under subsection 65(1) or section 74, 77 or 83 and provide a copy of it  —  including any written reasons  —  and any accompanying order to the Commission and to each person who exercised the right to be heard on the complaint.


General


Marginal note:Certain persons not compellable as witnesses

104 Persons providing mediation services under this Part are not competent or compellable to appear as witnesses in any civil action, suit or other proceeding respecting information obtained in the discharge of their functions under this Part.

Marginal note:Notes and drafts not to be disclosed

105 None of the following may be disclosed without the consent of the person who made them:

106 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 409]

107 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 409]

108 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 409]


Regulations


Marginal note:Regulations of Board

109 The Board may make regulations respecting

110 [Repealed, 2013, c. 40, s. 412]


PART 7Political Activities



Interpretation


Marginal note:Definitions


Purpose of Part


Marginal note:Purpose

112 The purpose of this Part is to recognize the right of employees to engage in political activities while maintaining the principle of political impartiality in the public service.


Employees


Marginal note:Permitted activities

Marginal note:Seeking candidacy

Marginal note:Candidacy in municipal elections

Marginal note:Notice

116 On granting an employee permission under subsection 114(4), leave under subsection 114(5) or permission under subsection 115(2), the Commission shall cause notice that it has done so, together with the name of that employee, to be published in the Canada Gazette.


Deputy Heads


Marginal note:Political activities

117 A deputy head shall not engage in any political activity other than voting in an election.


Allegations


Marginal note:Investigation and corrective action — employees

118 The Commission may investigate any allegation, in accordance with the regulations, that an employee has failed to comply with any of subsections 113(1), 114(1) to (3) and 115(1) and, if it concludes that the allegation is substantiated, may dismiss the employee or may take any corrective action that it considers appropriate.

Marginal note:Investigation and dismissal — deputy head

Marginal note:Powers under Inquiries Act

120 In conducting any investigation under this Part, the Commission has all the powers of a commissioner under Part II of the Inquiries Act.

Marginal note:Persons acting for Commission

Marginal note:Right to be heard

122 A person making an allegation under section 118 or 119 and the employee or deputy head against whom it is made — or their representatives — are entitled to be heard by the Commission, Commissioner or other person, whichever is conducting the investigation.


PART 8General



Application of Act


Marginal note:Regulations of Governor in Council

Marginal note:Application of regulations

124 A regulation made by the Commission, the Treasury Board or the Governor in Council under this Act may be of general application or may apply to a specified person, position, occupational group, organization or part of an organization, or any class of them, or in respect of a specified process or any class of process.


Head of Public Service


Marginal note:Appointment by Governor in Council

125 The Governor in Council may appoint and fix the remuneration of the Clerk of the Privy Council and Secretary to the Cabinet.

Marginal note:Clerk of Privy Council

126 The Clerk of the Privy Council and Secretary to the Cabinet is the head of the public service.

Marginal note:Report of head of the public service

127 The head of the public service shall submit a report on the state of the public service in each fiscal year to the Prime Minister, and the Prime Minister shall cause a copy of the report to be laid before each House of Parliament on any of the first fifteen days on which that House is sitting after the Prime Minister receives it.


Deputy Ministers and Other Senior Officials


Marginal note:Appointment by Governor in Council


Ministerial Staff


Marginal note:Ministerial staff

Marginal note:Regulations

129 The Governor in Council may make regulations applying all or any of the provisions of this Act to any of the positions of persons appointed by ministers under subsection 128(1).


Public Officials


Marginal note:Appointments by Governor in Council

130 The Governor in Council may appoint and fix the remuneration of


Diplomatic Personnel


Marginal note:Diplomatic appointments

131 Nothing in this Act shall be construed as affecting the right or authority of Her Majesty to appoint ambassadors, ministers, high commissioners or consuls-general of Canada to another country or to appoint other persons to represent Canada in another country.


Block Transfers


Marginal note:Transfer of employees


Offence


Marginal note:Fraud

133 Every person who commits fraud in any appointment process is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.


Oaths and Affirmations


Marginal note:Authority to administer

134 The Commission or a deputy head may administer oaths and receive affidavits, declarations and solemn affirmations in relation to matters within their respective jurisdictions under this Act.


Access to Facilities and Information


Marginal note:Access by Commission

135 Deputy heads and employees shall provide the Commission with any facilities, assistance, information and access to their respective offices that the Commission may require for the performance of its duties.


Five-year Review


Marginal note:Review

136 The minister designated by the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section shall cause a review of this Act and its administration and operation to be conducted five years after this section comes into force, and that minister shall cause a report of the review to be laid before each House of Parliament on any of the first fifteen days on which that House is sitting after the review is completed.


RELATED PROVISIONS


MAIN CONT DIV END


Page Details
