Skip to main content
Skip to "About government"
Switch to basic HTML version
Language selection
Français
/ Gouvernement du Canada
Search
Search Canada.ca
Search
Menu
MAIN
MENU
You are here:
Canada.ca Public Service Commission of Canada Appointment Framework Guides and Tools - Appointment Framework
Spotlight on area of selection

Area of selection refers to the criteria that individuals must meet to be eligible in a federal public service appointment process. For internal appointment processes, it also establishes who is eligible to make a complaint. This guidance covers the requirements for an area of selection, shares information on the requirement for a national area of selection and answers common questions.

The Appointment Delegation and Accountability Instrument requires deputy heads to establish a policy on area of selection for internal processes.

Some basics
Area of selection

Under section 34 of the Public Service Employment Act, an area of selection establishes who is eligible for an appointment process. It sets out the 4 criteria that can be used to establish the area of selection:

Geographic criteria refer to where candidates must reside or be employed to be eligible for an appointment process. If no geographic criterion is established, people who meet all the other criteria for area of selection would be eligible, no matter where they live or work.

Examples:

Persons residing within a 250 km radius of St. John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador.
Employees occupying a position located within the National Capital Region.

Organizational criteria refer to the organization, or part of the organization, in which candidates must be employed. When used, the organizational criterion must accurately describe a structure that can be recognized as an organizational entity.

Examples:

Persons employed by Department A.
Employees of the Human Resources Branch of Department X.

Occupational criteria refer to an occupational stream, program or group. They can be described generally, such as “health care services,” or be more explicit and identify a specific occupation or an occupational group or level (for example: FI, EC-3).

Example:

Employees of Department Y substantively occupying a position at the EC‑4 or equivalent group and level.

Designated employment equity groups as a criterion refers to people belonging to one or more of the employment equity groups as defined in section 3 of the Employment Equity Act. The groups are women, persons with disabilities, Aboriginal peoples and members of visible minorities.

Example:

Employees of the public service who are members of one of the following employment equity groups: persons with disabilities or members of visible minorities.
Eligibility for job opportunities in the federal public service

The Public Service Commission maintains a reference list that sets out:

the difference between “employees” and “persons employed”
whether employees or persons employed in a particular organization are eligible for internal appointment processes or deployments
whether employees or persons employed in a particular organization have mobility or priority appointment rights in accordance with the Public Service Employment Act or with the Public Service Employment Regulations
National area of selection

The national area of selection is required for all appointment processes advertised to the public. This requirement is found in the Public Service Commission’s Appointment Policy.

The phrase “Persons residing in Canada, and Canadian citizens and permanent residents abroad” expresses the national area of selection required for advertised external appointment processes. This wording ensures that advertised external appointment processes are open to a broad population that reflects the intent of the requirement for a national area of selection.

Annex A of the Appointment Policy provides the exclusions and exceptions to the requirement for a national area of selection. These address employment equity objectives, short-term work and some specific student employment situations. Deputy heads also have the authority to approve exceptions to a national area of selection for advertised external appointment processes in their organizations.

As set out in the Appointment Delegation and Accountability Instrument, exceptions approved by deputy heads must be reported to the Public Service Commission annually.

Canadian Free Trade Agreement

The Canadian Free Trade Agreement is an interprovincial trade agreement to facilitate the movement of people, goods, investments and services within Canada. This agreement is important for staffing in the public service because article 704(1)(a) prohibits provincial or territorial residency requirements for eligibility in external appointment processes.

Questions and answers
Expand all
Collapse all
1. Are there any parameters around deputy head approvals of exceptions to using a national area of selection?
2. What is a sliding area of selection and how can it be used?
3. What are the implications of a hybrid workforce on an area of selection?
4. Is there advice on establishing areas of selection to address under-representation of people belonging to designated employment equity groups?
5. How can we ensure areas of selection defined by regional organizational structures, such as Atlantic Region offices of Department X, respect mobility rights in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms?
6. What are the requirements of the Canadian Free Trade Agreement when establishing an area of selection?
Useful links
Public Service Employment Act – section 34
Reference list
Appointment Framework
Canadian Free Trade Agreement
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
Guidance on optimizing a hybrid workforce: Spotlight on telework
Support

Staffing support advisors at the Public Service Commission can provide guidance on what to consider when determining an area of selection.

Page details
 2025-01-08
About this site
Contact us
General enquiries
GC Jobs
Second language evaluation
Government of Canada
All contacts
Departments and agencies
About government
Themes and topics
Jobs
Immigration and citizenship
Travel and tourism
Business
Benefits
Health
Taxes
Environment and natural resources
National security and defence
Culture, history and sport
Policing, justice and emergencies
Transport and infrastructure
Canada and the world
Money and finances
Science and innovation
Indigenous Peoples
Veterans and military
Youth
Manage life events
Government of Canada Corporate
Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy