Skip to main content
Skip to "About government"
Switch to basic HTML version
Language selection
Français
/ Gouvernement du Canada
Search
Search Canada.ca
Search
Menu
MAIN
MENU
You are here:
Canada.ca Public Service Commission of Canada Appointment Framework
Student Bridging

Supporting organizational and public service-wide renewal goals

Did you know?

16.6% of all indeterminate and term hires had prior experience in a federal public service student employment program in the last 10 years.

Student bridging generally refers to the non-advertised appointment of a student who was employed in the federal public service through a student program such as the Federal Student Work Experience Program (FSWEP), the Post-Secondary Co-op/Internship Program (COOP) or the Research Affiliate Program (RAP).

Student bridging allows you to:

benefit from your investment in student hires
support your organizational and public service-wide renewal goals, including bringing in new competencies and skills
support diversity objectives, including enhancing regional and employment equity representation

Bridging a student is an appointment, subject to the same legislative and policy requirements as any other appointment, including considering persons with priority entitlements.  It must also align with your organizational staffing framework and your deputy head’s direction on the use of advertised and non-advertised processes.

Students employed through one of the federal student employment programs can be included in the area of selection of an advertised internal appointment process. In order to be considered, the students need to first meet any other area of selection criteria. Then they also need to demonstrate that they can complete their studies within the timeframe indicated in the advertisement, which shall be before the appointment.

Frequently Asked Questions
How has student bridging changed?
Is there a specific timeframe within which these appointments must be made?
Can a person who was employed as a student in one organization be appointed to a different organization after they graduate?
Can a student who did not participate in a Government of Canada student employment program be bridged?
Can someone who is or has been employed on a term or indeterminate basis since they completed their studies still be appointed based on student work experience?
Can students apply to advertised internal appointment processes while they are working for the Government of Canada?
Is the appointment of a person after graduation made on an advertised or a non-advertised basis?
For more information

Student bridging is one of a number of ways for deputy heads to achieve organizational or public service-wide renewal and diversity objectives. For more information, please talk to your Human Resources Advisor.

Page details
 2025-08-26
About this site
Contact us
General enquiries
GC Jobs
Second language evaluation
Government of Canada
All contacts
Departments and agencies
About government
Themes and topics
Jobs
Immigration and citizenship
Travel and tourism
Business
Benefits
Health
Taxes
Environment and natural resources
National security and defence
Culture, history and sport
Policing, justice and emergencies
Transport and infrastructure
Canada and the world
Money and finances
Science and innovation
Indigenous Peoples
Veterans and military
Youth
Manage life events
Government of Canada Corporate
Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy